Autocalibration of a Mobile UWB Localization System
for Ad-Hoc Multi-Robot Deployments in GNSS-Denied
Environments
Carmen Martı́nez Almansaa , Wang Shulea , Jorge Peña Queraltaa and
Tomi Westerlunda
a
    Turku Intelligent Embedded and Robotic Systems, University of Turku, Finland


                                         Abstract
                                         Ultra-wideband (UWB) wireless technology has seen an increased penetration in the robotics field
                                         as a robust localization method in recent years. UWB enables high accuracy distance estimation
                                         from time-of-flight measurements of wireless signals, even in non-line-of-sight measurements. UWB-
                                         based localization systems have been utilized in various types of GNSS-denied environments for
                                         ground or aerial autonomous robots. However, most of the existing solutions rely on a fixed and
                                         well-calibrated set of UWB nodes, or anchors, to estimate accurately the position of other mobile
                                         nodes, or tags, through multilateration. This limits the applicability of such systems for dynamic
                                         and ad-hoc deployments, such as post-disaster scenarios where the UWB anchors could be mounted
                                         on mobile robots to aid the navigation of UAVs or other robots. We introduce a collaborative
                                         algorithm for online autocalibration of anchor positions, enabling not only ad-hoc deployments but
                                         also movable anchors, based on Decawave’s DWM1001 UWB module. Compared to the built-in
                                         autocalibration process from Decawave, we drastically reduce the amount of calibration time and
                                         increase the accuracy at the same time. We provide both experimental measurements and simulation
                                         results to demonstrate the usability of this algorithm.

                                         Keywords
                                         Ultra-wideband, Localization, UWB, Robotics, GNSS-Denied Environments, Multi-Robot Systems




1. Introduction
The utilization of UWB radios for both localization and short-range data transmission started
to gain momentum after the unlicensed usage legalization in 2002 [1], and the IEEE standards
released in 2007 [2]. Nonetheless, only in recent years UWB-based localization systems have
seen wider adoption in the robotics domain, owing to their high accuracy, and often as a
replacement to GNSS sensors in GNSS-denied environments [3]. UWB-based systems are
now being utilized for communication and localization [4], or as short-range radar systems for
mapping or navigation, among other applications [5].
   UWB-based localization systems provide an inexpensive alternative to high-accuracy mo-
tion capture systems for navigation in application scenarios where a localization accuracy
of the order of tens of centimeters is sufficient [6]. In GNSS-denied environments, UWB-
based localization systems can provide a robust alternative to visual odometry methods [7],

ICL-GNSS 2020 WiP Proceedings, June 02–04, 2020, Tampere, Finland
email: carmen.c.martinez@utu.fi (C. Martı́nez Almansa); shule.s.wang@utu.fi (W. Shule); jopequ@utu.fi (J.
Peña Queralta); tovewe@utu.fi (T. Westerlund)
orcid: 0000-0001-5778-0341 (C. Martı́nez Almansa); 0000-0002-9037-959X (W. Shule); 0000-0003-3091-3217
(J. Peña Queralta); 0000-0002-1793-2694 (T. Westerlund)
                                       c 2020 Copyright for this paper by its authors.
                                       Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
    CEUR
    Workshop
    Proceedings
                  http://ceur-ws.org
                  ISSN 1613-0073       CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)
                                                                                         Anchor 0
                                                                                         Anchor 1
                                                                                         Anchor 2
                                                                                         Anchor 3
                                                                                         Anchor 4
                                                                                         Tag
                                                                                         Autocalib.
                                                                                         Tag Local.




Figure 1: UWB localization and autocalibration concept. The circles are defined by the UWB-measured
range between each of the anchors and the tag. The dotted lines represent the inter-anchor measurements
taken during the autocalibration process. The number of tags and anchors is arbitrary, and only one tag is
shown here for illustrative purposes.


or other methods that rely only on information acquired onboard mobile agents, such as li-
dar odometry [8], which present challenges in long-term autonomy. Therefore, UWB-based
localization systems enable longer operations and tighter control over the behavior of mobile
robots. Moreover, accurate relative localization in multi-robot systems can aid information
control algorithms, such as those where only relative position estimation is needed [9, 10], or
collaborative tasks requiring multi-source sensor fusion [11], such as cooperative mapping [12]
or docking of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) on mobile platforms [4].
   One of the main limitations of UWB-based localization systems, which they share with many
other wireless localization systems based on active beacons, is that they require a predefined
set of beacons to be located in known positions in the operational environment [13]. In UWB
systems, these fixed radio nodes are often called anchors, while mobile nodes are called tags.
Fixed anchors are required because only ranging information can be extracted from UWB
signals. From a set of at least three anchor-tag distance measurements, the position of a tag
can be calculated from the anchors’ positions utilizing multilateration methods [14].
   Current systems, which mainly rely on a fixed set of anchors as a reference, require accurate
calibration of the anchor positions, this significantly limiting their applicability. Motivated by
this, we have developed an automatic calibration method that allows these anchors to be mobile
and hence to be used in dynamic localization systems. The typical procedure to estimate the
position of a mobile tag based on the position of fixed anchors is depicted in Figure. 1, where
the radius of each circle is defined by the distance to the tag estimated through UWB ranging.
The tag can locate itself by estimating the individual distances to each of the anchors (solid
line), while inter-anchor distances (dotted lines) can be utilized by the anchors themselves to
calibrate their positions.
   In summary, our main objective is the design and development of a mobile UWB-based
localization system that can be utilized for localization in multi-robot systems in GNSS-denied
environments. This paper presents initial results in this direction. The DWM1001 UWB
transceiver from Decawave has been utilized and we have developed an autocalibration as
part of wider UWB experiments reported in [14]. The code is made publicly available in our
GitHub repository1 , where we have released an initial version of the autocalibration firmware
for Decawave’s DWM1001 development board. We utilize UWB accuracy measurements from
our experiments to simulate the performance of a mobile UWB-based localization system. This
paper, therefore, focuses on the results of those simulations to assess the viability and usability
of the proposed system.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related works
regarding the autocalibration of UWB localization systems and provide a broad overview of
their potential applications. Section 3 then introduces the details about the UWB calibration
and localization process, with initial results reported in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes
the work and outlines future research directions.


2. Related work
In this section, we first review existing autocalibration methods for UWB-based localization
systems. Then, we analyze in more detail the autocalibration method included in the De-
cawave’s firmware, as well as its requirements and drawbacks.
   An early approach to automatic calibration of UWB radios in mobile robots localization
systems was proposed by K. C. Cheok et al. [15]. The algorithm proposed by the authors is
capable of determining the coordinates of four anchors from UWB measurements estimating
the distance between each pair of anchors. The algorithm relies on the following assumptions
to calculate the anchor positions: there must exist a known order of the four anchors such as
anchor 0 defines the origin of coordinates; anchor 0 and 1 define the positive x-axis direction;
and the plane x-y is defined by the first three anchors.
   Another autocalibration UWB-based multi-robot localization system presented by M. Hamer
et al. is stricter in terms of assumptions [16]. In addition to the aforementioned conditions,
in this second system it is also assumed that anchor 2 lies on the positive y-direction, anchor
3 on the positive z-axis and all anchors are at fixed positions. Moreover, the system relies on
clock synchronization, since the localization is based on time difference of arrival (TDoA).
   Several other works have presented on-board localization systems based on UWB technology
for either one target [17, 18], or multiple targets [19]. In these papers, the anchors are situated
on a mobile platform. The relative position of the tag, which is mounted on the target robot
or person, is estimated from the distances between itself and the anchors.
   Regarding Decawave’s UWB modules, a built-in calibration system is available through their
mobile application as part of Decawave’s real-time localization system (DRTLS). This process,
called auto-positioning, can be utilized with a minimum a priori knowledge of the anchor
positions: it requires the anchors (up to four) to be arranged in a rectangular shape, at an
equal or similar height, and in counter-clockwise order. In addition to this, we have found the
calculation time of this algorithm to be around 40 s and the error above 1 m in deployments
where the inter-anchor distance was less than 20 m. These characteristics make the algorithm
overly slow and inaccurate to be suitable for mobile settings. The lack of accuracy is warned
in the app itself, where it is recommended to measure and introduce the anchor positions
   1
       TIERS UWB Dataset: https://github.com/tiers/uwb drone dataset
manually since the autocalibration feature makes the positioning less precise. Decawave devices
are some of the most widely used UWB ranging modules [20], and thus there is an evident
need for faster and more accurate autocalibration methods to enable faster ad-hoc and even
mobile deployments.


3. Autocalibrating a Mobile UWB Localization System
In this section, we first describe how distance can be estimated from the time of flight of a
UWB signal, and then introduce our proposed autocalibration method for the anchors.

3.1. UWB Ranging
The two main methods for UWB ranging measurements, also applicable to other wireless
ranging technologies, are time of flight (ToF) and time difference of arrival (TDoA).
   ToF is a method for estimating the distance between an emitter and a receiver node multi-
plying the time of flight of the signal between a single pair of transceivers, usually an anchor
and a tag, by the speed of light in air [21]. It’s a two-way ranging (TWR) technology, requiring
transmissions in both directions. In single-side TWR (SS-TWR), a transmitter, or initiator,
sends a poll message which then receiving node replies to. By measuring the total time until it
obtains a response, the initiator can then estimate the distance that separates it from the node
that replied to the message. In this situation, the antenna delays and the fixed time required
to process the poll message and send the response at the receiving node must be known and
taken into account when estimating the distance. Double-side TWR (DS-TWR) eliminates
the need for calibration by adding an additional response, or final message, from the initiator
to the second message.
   TDoA is another widely-used method for locating a mobile node by detecting the time
difference of arrival (TDoA) between wireless signals received at multiple interconnected an-
chors [22]. In this algorithm, the anchors need to be synchronized, and then the hyperbolic
branch is drawn for each anchor pair through the difference between the reception time of the
main anchor and other anchors [21]. Then, the point where all the hyperbolic intersections
occur is taken as the approximate location of the tag. TDoA ranging is also called hyperbolic
ranging.

3.2. Autocalibration of Anchors
The aim of our work is to develop a UWB-based localization system with built-in autocalibra-
tion, which could be used for the localization of multi-robot systems in dynamic scenarios. Our
customized autocalibration method relies on a series of assumptions for the first measurement,
in order to localize the system in the space. These initial assumptions are similar to those in
the related works described in the previous section:
   • The first anchor (Anchor 0) is situated at the origin of coordinates.

   • The direction from Anchor 0 to Anchor 1 defines the positive x-axis.

   • All other anchors lie in the half-plane with positive y-coordinate.
  Based on these assumptions, the initial calibration step estimates the position of each of
the anchors based on the measured distances to the first two anchors defining the origin of
Figure 2: Decawave’s DWM1001 Development Board, which has been utilized in the experiments.


Table 1
Latency of the Autopositioning method from Decawave’s DRTLS compared to our self-calibration method
for anchors.
                                                          Latency
                           RTLS Autopositioning           40 s ± 5 s
                           Custom Calibration (x50)       2.5 s ± 0.1 s
                           Custom Calibration (x5)        0.9 s ± 0.05 s


coordinates and the positive x-axis direction. Then, the position of all anchors is adjusted by
minimizing the error between the inter-anchor distances and the UWB ranging measurements
with a least squares estimator (LSE). After the initial calibration step, the only assumption
we make is that the position anchor 0 defines the origin. The reason behind these relaxed
conditions regarding the x and y axis is that our experiments have shown that the rotational
error is negligible. This implies more flexible conditions than in previous works [16] and [15].
   In our autocalibration process, every anchor behaves as initiator and responder in turns. The
anchor that defines the origin is the first initiator. The process is initiated by a start command
sent to the corresponding anchor through the UART interface. This first initiator, henceforth
referred to as Anchor 0, calculates the distances to each of the other anchors. The distances
are estimated based on the time of flight (TOF) using SS-TWR. The communication is done
in pairs, only after receiving the distance measurement from one responder and broadcasting
it, the initiator will start communication with the following one.
   Once the initiator has gathered the distance values to every other anchor, it will send a
message to the following one, according to the counter-clockwise order established, and will
change its mode to responder. The recipient of the message will become initiator and start the
cycle again. When the last anchor in the network finishes its measurements, it will send the
message to the Anchor 0, which will become initiator again, and await the next start trigger.
Calibrations should occur periodically whenever the inter-calibration positioning error at the
anchors exceeds a certain error threshold. The inter-calibration positioning can be done with
other on-board methods, such as visual or lidar odometry.
   This autocalibration process has been implemented in C and the firmware for Decawave’s
DWM1001 Development board, illustrated in Figure. 2, has been made publicly available
in Github. In Table 1, we show the latency when we take 5 or 50 measurements for each
pair of anchors. Table 2 shows the difference in calibration accuracy between our firmware
Table 2
Accuracy of the Autopositioning method from Decawave’s DRTLS compared to our self-calibration method
for anchors.
               Covered        RTLS Autopositioning         Our Autocalibration
                Area           Min. Err. Max. Err.         Min. Err. Max. Err.
               1 m2                 9 cm      52 cm             4 cm       39 cm
               9 m2                 4 cm      28 cm             5 cm       24 cm
               144 m2             163 cm     219 cm           135 cm      182 cm


and Decawave’s DRTLS autopositioning system, the latter being a process that is triggered
through the mobile application. In our implementation, every time the autocalibration occurs,
multiple measurements are taken and the average and standard deviation are shared with all
other anchors to estimate each other’s positions.


4. Experimental Results
In order to test the accuracy and usability of the autocalibration algorithm, we report two
different types of results. First, we have measured the accuracy of UWB ranging with the
DWM1001 transceiver, and the maximum error in which our autocalibration firmware incurs
has been shown in Table 2. Second, we have utilized this data to study the localization accuracy
in a simulation of a mobile deployment with multiple anchors and tags.
   Regarding the measurements with the DWM1001 development board, we tested our auto-
calibration firmware to measure its latency and accuracy. The deployed network consisted of
four anchors, one of which was placed in line of sight at different distances, ranging from 0.5 m
to 22 m. The distances measured by the UWB modules during this experiment are depicted in
Figure. 3. The results yielded from this experiment served to characterize the modules’ error.
   In the simulation, we have also utilized 4 anchors. A minimum of three anchors is needed,
but four anchors increase the system robustness in case one of the ranging measurements fail
or the error is significant [14]. In addition, three tags were situated within the figure formed
by the anchors to be localized. The movement of the anchors and the tags was generated
following a constant direction with added random Gaussian noise. In every step, a random
value in the interval (−0.1 m, +0.1 m) was added to each anchor’s position, representing the
error of the on-board position estimation utilized between calibrations. This range of values
was chosen in order to have a significant error accumulated between calibrations and test the
ability of the autocalibration process to bring the error down. The anchors’ calibration was
performed every ten steps in the simulation. Both the calibration of the anchor positions and
the positioning of the tags are done utilizing a least squares estimator, except for the initial
positioning step before the movement starts.
   The results of our simulation are shown in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 shows the distribution
of translation and rotation errors. The translation error was calculated for both anchors and
tags and is illustrated in subfigure 4a. The rotation error in subfigure 4b shows the error in the
angle calculated between the x-axis and the line crossing the origin and Anchor 1. Note that
Anchor 1 does not necessarily lie in the x-axis after the movement starts. In cases where the
distance between these two anchors is enough this error is small. Therefore, the assumption
that Anchor 1 defines the x-axis is only needed before the movement of the anchors starts.
                                                Linear fit
    Measured Distance (m)   20                  Raw data


                            15


                            10


                            5


                            0
                                     0                        2         4         6         8       10       12     14                        16         18         20   22
                                                                                                  Real Distance (m)


                                                                  2.0
                                                                              Linear fit
                                                                  1.8
                                         Meas. Distance (m)




                                                                              Raw data
                                                                  1.6
                                                                  1.4
                                                                  1.2
                                                                  1.0
                                                                  0.8
                                                                  0.6
                                                                  0.4
                                                                            0.6       0.8       1.0        1.2      1.4                 1.6        1.8        2.0
                                                                                                      Real Distance (m)

Figure 3: Experimental measurements and fitted line utilized for the simulations. The offset created by the
responder delay has been already adjusted in the raw data measurements.

                             0.8

                                                                                                                               0.010

                             0.6
                                                                                                                 Error (rad)
                Error (m)




                                                                                                                               0.000

                             0.4

                                                                                                                               -0.010
                             0.2


                                                                                                                               -0.020
                                 0

                                                         Anchors                            Tag                                                               X Axis

                                               (a) Translation Error                                                                      (b) Rotation Error
Figure 4: Translation and rotation error distribution for the anchors and tags. The rotation error refers only
to the X-axis, defined as the direction between the origin anchor and the first one in the counter-clockwise
direction.
                             0.7       A1
                                       A2
     Anchor Position Error

                             0.6       A3
                             0.5
                             0.4
                             0.3
                             0.2
                             0.1
                             0.0
                                   0        5   10   15   20        25       30       35        40        45        50        55
                                                                 Simulation Steps

  (a) Error in the estimated position of anchors. The UWB calibration happens every ten simulation
      steps.
                             0.5                                                                                          Tag1
                                                                                                                          Tag2
                             0.4                                                                                          Tag3
    Tag Position Error




                             0.3

                             0.2

                             0.1

                             0.0
                                   0        5   10   15   20        25       30        35       40        45        50        55
                                                                 Simulation Steps

  (b) Error in the estimated position of the tag during the simulation. The position of the tag is
      always calculated from the anchor positions based on UWB ranging.
                             80
                                                                                      Tag1      Tag2
                                                                                      Tag3      A0
      X-Axis Position (m)




                             60                                                       A1        A2
                                                                                      A3

                             40


                             20


                              0
                                   0        5   10   15    20         25        30         35        40        45        50
                                                                Y-Axis Position (m)

  (c) Paths followed by the anchors and tags over the simulation. The paths have individual random
      components.
Figure 5: Simulation results for a system with four anchors and three tags. The figures show the error and
paths over time of the anchors and tags. The position estimation of the anchors between calibrations are
defined with a random error at each simulation step.
Finally, Subfigures 5a and 5b show the error in anchors and tags positioning over a simulation
of 55 steps, respectively. It can be observed how calibration, performed every 10 steps, reduces
significantly the anchors’ positional error. The number of steps shown in this figure is reduced
for visualization purposes. We have carried out over 20 simulations with up to 1000 steps and
observed the same behavior.


5. Conclusion and Future Work
Motivated by the limitation on the applicability of UWB-based localization systems on dynamic
scenarios, we have presented a mobile UWB-localization system with built-in autocalibration
that can be deployed within a multi-robot system. The UWB anchors can be placed on mobile
ground vehicles to support, for instance, the operation of UAVs and other robots in GNSS-
denied environments. The key advantage of the proposed system is the periodic built-in self
autocalibration of anchor positions. This allows for the localization error to stay within a
certain tolerance even if the anchors are moving.
  In future work, we will experiment with real multi-robot systems and provide a more ex-
haustive analysis of the usability of the proposed system in complex scenarios. We will also
extend the calibration and localization approaches modeling the robots’ dynamics and their
odometry algorithms.


Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Academy of Finland’s AutoSOS project (grant number
328755).


References
 [1] F. C. Commission, et al., First report and order 02-48, Washington, DC, USA (2002).
 [2] E. Karapistoli, F. Pavlidou, I. Gragopoulos, I. Tsetsinas, An overview of the ieee 802.15.
     4a standard, IEEE Communications Magazine 48 (2010) 47–53.
 [3] N. Macoir, J. Bauwens, B. Jooris, B. Van Herbruggen, J. Rossey, J. Hoebekeand, E. De
     Poorter, Uwb localization with battery-powered wireless backbone for drone-based inven-
     tory management, Sensors 19 (2019).
 [4] T. Nguyen, T. H. Nguyen, M. Cao, Z. Qiu, L. Xie, Integrated uwb-vision approach for
     autonomous docking of uavs in gps-denied environments, in: ICRA, IEEE, 2019.
 [5] J. D. Taylor, Ultra-wideband radar technology, CRC press, 2018.
 [6] J. S. Furtado, Comparative analysis of optitrack motion capture systems, in: Advances
     in Motion Sensing and Control for Robotic Applications, Springer, 2019.
 [7] L. Qingqing, J. Peña Queralta, T. N. Gia, T. Westerlund, Offloading Monocular Visual
     Odometry with Edge Computing: Optimizing Image Compression Ratios in Multi-Robot
     Systems, in: The 5th ICSCC, IEEE, 2019.
 [8] V. K. Sarker, J. Peña Queralta, T. N. Gia, H. Tenhunen, T. Westerlund, Offloading slam
     for indoor mobile robots with edge-fog-cloud computing, in: ICASERT), 2019.
 [9] K. Guo, X. Li, L. Xie, Ultra-wideband and odometry-based cooperative relative localiza-
     tion with application to multi-uav formation control, IEEE transactions on cybernetics
     (2019).
[10] J. Peña Queralta, T. N. Gia, H. Tenhunen, T. Westerlund, L. Qingqing, Z. Zou, Dis-
     tributed progressive formation control with one-way communication for multi-agent sys-
     tems, in: 2019 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, 2019.
[11] J. Peña Queralta, T. Westerlund, Blockchain-powered collaboration in heterogeneous
     swarms of robots, arXiv prepring (2020). Symposium on Blockchain for Robotic Systems,
     MIT Media Lab.
[12] J. Peña Queralta, T. Nguyen Gia, H. Tenhunen, T. Westerlund, Collaborative mapping
     with ioe-based heterogeneous vehicles for enhanced situational awareness, in: IEEE Sen-
     sors Applications Symposium (SAS), 2019.
[13] F. Zafari, A. Gkelias, K. K. Leung, A survey of indoor localization systems and technolo-
     gies, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 21 (2019) 2568–2599.
[14] J. Peña Queralta, C. Martı́nez Almansa, F. Schiano, D. Floreano, T. Westerlund, Uwb-
     based system for uav localization in gnss-denied environments: Characterization and
     dataset, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04380 (2020).
[15] K. C. Cheok, M. Radovnikovich, P. Vempaty, G. R. Hudas, J. L. Overholt, P. Fleck, Uwb
     tracking of mobile robots, in: 21st Annual IEEE International Symposium on Personal,
     Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2010, pp. 2615–2620.
[16] M. Hamer, R. D’Andrea, Self-calibrating ultra-wideband network supporting multi-robot
     localization, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 22292–22304.
[17] S. Güler, J. Jiang, A. A. Alghamdi, R. I. Masoud, J. S. Shamma, Real time onboard
     ultrawideband localization scheme for an autonomous two-robot system, in: 2018 IEEE
     Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA), 2018, pp. 1151–1158.
[18] B. Hepp, T. Nägeli, O. Hilliges, Omni-directional person tracking on a flying robot using
     occlusion-robust ultra-wideband signals, in: 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
     Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016, pp. 189–194.
[19] S. Güler, M. Abdelkader, J. S. Shamma, Infrastructure-free multi-robot localization with
     ultrawideband sensors, in: 2019 American Control Conference (ACC), 2019, pp. 13–18.
[20] P. Dawei, Y. Yunhua, Design of indoor position system based on DWM1000 modules 585
     (2019) 012067.
[21] R. Mazraani, M. Saez, L. Govoni, D. Knobloch, Experimental results of a combined
     tdoa/tof technique for uwb based localization systems, in: ICC Workshops, IEEE, 2017.
[22] Z. Wei, X. Chen, L. Fang, N. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Li, Joint positioning technique based on
     tof and tdoa, in: 2018 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology
     Conference (I2MTC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
