TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, DECEMBER 2005                                                                                1




                   A Theory of Network Localization



                                      J. Aspnes, T. Eren Member, IEEE
            D.K. Goldenberg Student Member, IEEE, A. S. Morse Fellow, IEEE
                                 W. Whiteley, Y. R. Yang Member, IEEE,
              B. D. O. Anderson Fellow, IEEE, P. N. Belhumeur Fellow, IEEE




  Manuscript received June 2004; revised December 2005.
  J. Aspnes is supported by NSF grants CCR-9820888 and CCR-0098078. T. Eren and P.N. Belhumeur are supported by NSF
grants ITR IIS-00-85864, IIS-03-25864, EIA-02-24431 and IIS-03-08185. D.K. Goldenberg is supported by NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship DGE0202738. W. Whiteley is supported by grants from NSERC (Canada) and NIH (USA). A.S. Morse is supported by
grants from NSF and the US Army Research Office. Y. R. Yang is supported by NSF grant ANI-0207399. B. D. O. Anderson is
supported by National ICT Australia, which is funded by the Australian Government’s Department of Communications, Information
Technology and the Arts and the Australian Research Council through the Backing Australia’s Ability initiative and the ICT Centre
of Excellence Program.
February 7, 2006                                                                                                          DRAFT
                                                     Abstract

         In this paper we provide a theoretical foundation for the problem of network localization in which
     some nodes know their locations and other nodes determine their locations by measuring the distances
     to their neighbors. We construct grounded graphs to model network localization and apply graph rigidity
     theory to test the conditions for unique localizability and to construct uniquely localizable networks. We
     further study the computational complexity of network localization and investigate a subclass of grounded
     graphs where localization can be computed efficiently. We conclude with a discussion of localization in
     sensor networks where the sensors are placed randomly.



                                              I. I NTRODUCTION
  Location service is a fundamental building block of many emerging computing/networking
paradigms. For example, in pervasive computing [23], [59], knowing the locations of the computers
and the printers in a building will allow a computer to send a printing job to the nearest printer.
In sensor networks, the sensor nodes need to know their locations in order to detect and record
events, and to route packets using geometric routing (e.g., [38]).
  Manual configuration is one method to determine the location of a node. However, this is unlikely
to be feasible for large-scale deployments and scenarios in which nodes move often. GPS [32]
is another possibility, however it is costly in terms of both hardware and power requirements.
Furthermore, since GPS requires line-of-sight between the receiver and satellites, it may not work
well in buildings or in the presence of obstructions such as dense vegetation, buildings, or mountains
blocking the direct view to the GPS satellites.
  Recently, novel schemes have been proposed to determine the locations of the nodes in a network
where only some special nodes (called beacons) know their locations (e.g., [28], [44], [53]). In these
schemes, network nodes measure the distances to their neighbors and then try to determine their
locations. The process of computing the locations of the nodes is called network localization.
For example, in [53], Savvides et al. propose an iterative multilateration scheme to determine the
locations of nodes that do not know their locations initially.
  Although the designs of the previous schemes have demonstrated great engineering ingenuity
and their effectiveness in certain settings verified through extensive simulations, some fundamental
questions have not been addressed. As a result, the previous schemes are mainly heuristic-based
and a full theoretical foundation of network localization is still lacking.
  Specifically, we identify the following three fundamental questions:
                                                 2
  1) What are the conditions for unique network localizability? Although the network localization
      problem has already been studied extensively, the precise conditions under which the network
      localization problem is solvable (i.e., has a unique solution) are not known.
  2) What is the computational complexity of network localization? Even though the computational
      complexity of graph embeddability has been investigated before (e.g., general graphs by
      Saxe [54] and unit disk graphs by Breu and Kirkpatrick [9]), the computational complexity
      of determining the locations of the nodes in a uniquely localizable network has not been
      studied.
  3) What is the complexity of network localization in typical network deployment scenarios?
      Furthermore, for a large-scale sensor network, it may not be possible to control the placement
      of the sensor nodes precisely. Rather, they may be placed uniformly or randomly in a region.
      The unique localizability and computational complexity of such scenarios have not been
      investigated.
  The objective of this paper is to provide systematic answers to these three questions. Many but
not all of the ideas of this paper were presented in preliminary form by Eren et al. in [20]. In this
paper, we extend these ideas and provide formal proofs. In particular, we address the first question
using graph rigidity theory, the second for arbitrary uniquely localizable networks and uniquely
localizable unit disk networks, and the third for unit disk networks of randomly placed nodes.
  More specifically, in order to answer the first question, we propose the notion of grounded graphs.
In these graphs, each vertex represents a network node, and two vertices in the graph are connected
if the distance between the two is known; that is, when the distance between the two nodes is
measured or when the two nodes are beacon nodes and their distance is implicitly known. Given
our construction of grounded graphs, we show that a network has a unique localization if and only
if its corresponding grounded graph is generically globally rigid. By observing this connection, we
are able to apply results from the graph-rigidity literature to network localization and thus provide a
systematic and pleasantly intuitive answer to the first question. For example, to check if a network
in the plane is unique localizable, we just need to check if the corresponding grounded graph is
3-connected and redundantly rigid, both of which can be efficiently checked.
  In addition, we demonstrate conditions and inductive sequences for constructing uniquely local-
izable networks, both in the plane and in 3-space. For instance, we show that a network with a
biconnected grounded graph is uniquely localizable if two-hop neighbors are connected, e.g., by

                                                  3
doubling the range of distance measurements in a sensor network. By using our results, a designer
of a network can be assured that the constructed network is uniquely localizable, thus avoiding
expensive trial-and-error procedures.
  To address the second question, we analyze the computational complexity of network localization
when the grounded graph is a generically globally rigid graph and show NP-hardness with a
reduction from set-partition. To strengthen this insight, we show that even in the idealized case that
distance measurements are present between all nodes within less than a certain known distance of
each other, localization is still NP-hard.
  To address the third question, we explore the density-dependent average-case complexity of
network localization in realistic settings like sensor networks, and study a class of graphs in the
plane called trilateration graphs. We show that trilateration graphs are uniquely localizable and
the locations of the nodes can be computed efficiently. We show that random geometric graphs
are trilateration graphs with high probability if a certain node density or communication radius is
reached. We provide asymptotic results on the densities of the beacons sufficient for trilateration
                                  p                      √
to be carried out in O(1) step, O( log(n)) steps, or O( n) steps, respectively, where n is the
number of nodes in the network.
  The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The specific network localization problem to be
addressed is formulated in Section II. The concepts of rigidity and global rigidity are discussed in
Section III. In Section IV, sufficient conditions for localization and construction of localizable
networks are presented. In Section V, we study the computational complexity of solving the
localization problem. In Section VI, we study localization of random geometric graphs in the
plane. In Section VII, we present simulation results for localization in 3-space geometric graphs. In
Section VIII, we discuss related work. Our conclusion and future work are presented in Section IX.


                                         II. F ORMULATION
A. The Network Localization Problem
  In this paper we shall be concerned with the “network localization problem with distance infor-
mation” which can be formulated as follows. One begins with a network N in real d-dimensional
space (where d = 2 or 3) consisting of a set of m > 0 nodes labelled 1 through m that represent
special “beacon” nodes together with n − m > 0 additional nodes labelled m + 1 through n that
represent ordinary nodes. Each node is located at a fixed position in IRd and has associated with it

                                                  4
a specific set of “neighboring” nodes. Although a node’s neighbors are typically defined to be all
other nodes within some specified range, other definitions could also be used (e.g., those considering
the effects of obstacles). The essential property we will require in this paper is that the definition
of a neighbor be a symmetric relation on {1, 2, . . . , n} in the sense that node j is a neighbor of
node i if and only if node i is also a neighbor of node j. Under these conditions N’s neighbor
relationships can be conveniently described by an undirected graph GN = (V, EN ) with vertex set
V = {1, 2, . . . , n} and edge set EN defined so that (i, j) is one of the graph’s edges precisely when
nodes i and j are neighbors. We assume throughout that GN is a connected graph. The network
localization problem with distance information is to determine the locations pi of all nodes in IRd
given the graph of the network GN , the positions of the beacons pj , j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m} in IRd , and
the distance δN (i, j) between each neighbor pair (i, j) ∈ EN .
   The network localization problem just formulated is said to be solvable if there is exactly one
set of vectors {pm+1 , . . . pn } in IRd consistent with the given data GN , {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm }, and δN :
EN → IR. In this paper we will be concerned with “generic” solvability of the problem which
means, roughly speaking, that the problem should be solvable not only for the given data but also
for slightly perturbed but consistent versions of the given data. It is possible to make precise what
generic solvability means as follows. Fix GN and let e1 , e2 , . . . , eq denote the edges in EN . Note
that for any set of n points y1 , y2 , . . . , yn in IRd there is a unique distance vector z whose k − th
component (element) is the distance between yi and yj where (i, j) = ek . This means that there
is a well-defined function f : IRnd → IR(md+q) mapping {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } 7−→ {y1 , y2 , . . . , ym , z}.
Solvability of the network localization problem is equivalent to f being injective at {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }
in the sense that the only set of points {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } ∈ IRnd for which f (y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) =
f (p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ) is {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }. In this context it is natural to say that the
network localization problem is generically solvable at {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } if it is solvable at each point
in an open neighborhood of {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }. In other words, the localization problem is solvable
at {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } if there is an open neighborhood of {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } on which f is an injective
function.

B. Point Formations
   To study the solvability of the network localization problem, we reformulate the problem in terms
of a “point formation”. As we shall see, the point formation relevant to the network localization
problem has associated with it the grounded graph of the network, ĜN , with the same vertices as
                                               5
GN but with a slightly larger edge set which adds “links” or edges from every beacon to every
other. It is a property of ĜN rather than GN which proves to be central to the solvability of the
localization problem under consideration.
  We begin by reviewing the point formation concept. By a d-dimensional point formation [19] at
  ∆
p = column {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }, written Fp , is meant a set of n points {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } in IRd together
with a set L of k links, labelled (i, j), where i and j are distinct integers in {1, 2, . . . , n}; the length
of link (i, j) is the Euclidean distance between point pi and pj . The idea of a point formation is
essentially the same as the concept of a “framework” studied in mathematics [51], [60], [61] as well
as within the theory of structures in mechanical and civil engineering. For our purposes, a point
formation Fp = ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }, L) provides a natural high-level model for an n-node network in
real 2 or 3 dimensional space. In this context, the points pi represent the positions of nodes (i.e.,
both beacons and ordinary nodes), in IRd and the links in L label those specific node pairs whose
inter-node distances are given. Thus for the network N, L would consist of all edges in ĜN , since
the distance between every pair of beacons is determined by their specified positions.
                                                                            ∆                                    ∆
  Each point formation Fp uniquely determines a graph GFp = {V, L} with vertex set V =
{1, 2, . . . , n} and edge set L, as well as a distance function δ : L → IR whose value at (i, j) ∈ L is
the distance between pi and pj . Let us note that the distance function of Fp is the same as the distance
function of any point formation Fq with the same graph as Fp provided q is congruent to p in the
sense that there is a distance preserving map T : IRd → IRd such that T (qi ) = pi , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}.
In the next section, we will say that two point formations Fp and Fq are congruent if they have
the same graph and if q and p are congruent. It is clear that Fp is uniquely determined by its
graph and distance function at most up to a congruence transformation. A formation that is exactly
determined up to congruence by its graph and distance function is called “globally rigid.” More
precisely, a d-dimensional point formation Fp is said to be globally rigid if each d-dimensional
point formation Fq with the same graph and distance function as Fp is congruent to Fp . It is clear
that any formation whose graph is complete is globally rigid. The following simple generalizations
of this fact in Lemma 1 provide sufficient conditions for global rigidity that are especially relevant
to the network localization problem. In d dimensions, we say a set of points p1 , . . . , pd+1 is in
general position if it does not lie in a proper subspace (i.e., three points in the plane do not lie on
a line, and four points in space do not lie in a plane).

  Lemma 1:
                                                        6
  Let Fp = ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pn }, L) be an n-point formation in IR2 that contains three points pa , pb ,
and pc in general position. Suppose that the graph of the formation GFp contains the complete
graph on {a, b, c}. If the only n-point formation in IR2 that contains these three points and has the
same link set as Fp is Fp itself, then Fp is globally rigid.

This property is a direct consequence of the fact that the identity on IR2 is the only distance
preserving map T : IR2 → IR2 that leaves pa , pb , and pc unchanged. A directly analogous property
holds in three dimensions. A proof of the lemma will not be given.


C. Solvability of the Network Localization Problem
  With the previous definition of point formations, we can now restate the network localization
problem in terms of its associated point formation Fp . In the present context, the problem is to
determine Fp , given the graph and distance function of Fp as well as the beacon position vectors
p1 , p2 , . . . , pm . Solvability of the problem demands that Fp be globally rigid; for if Fp were not
globally rigid it would be impossible to determine Fp up to congruence, let alone to determine it
uniquely. Assuming Fp is globally rigid, solvability of the network localization problem reduces to
making sure that the group of transformations T that leaves the set {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm } unchanged –
namely distance preserving transformations T : IRd → IRd for which T (pi ) = pi , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}
– also leaves unchanged the set {pm+1 , . . . , pn }. The easiest way to guarantee this in IR2 is to
require {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm } to contain three points pi1 , pi2 , pi3 in general position; for if this is so, then
the only distance preserving transformation that leaves {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm } unchanged is the identity
map on IR2 . Similarly, if in IR3 , {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm } contains at least four points in general position,
then T will again be an identity map, in this case on IR3 . We summarize the main result for the
solvability of network localization as follows.

  Theorem 1: Let N be a network in IRd , d = 2 or 3, consisting of m > 0 beacons located at
positions p1 , p2 , . . . , pm and n − m > 0 ordinary nodes located at positions pm+1 , . . . , pn . Suppose
that for the case d = 2 there are at least three beacons in general position. Similarly, for the case
d = 3 suppose there are at least four beacons positioned at points in general position. Let Fp denote
the point formation whose points are at p1 , p2 , . . . , pn and whose links are those labelled by all
neighbor pairs and all beacon pairs in N. Then for both d = 2 and d = 3 the network localization
problem is solvable if and only if Fp is globally rigid.

                                                         7
                                 III. R IGIDITY AND G LOBAL R IGIDITY
  In the previous section, we have established that under certain mild conditions, the solvability
of the network localization problem is equivalent to the “global rigidity” of point formation. In
this section we review results from rigidity theory which allow us to check for “global rigidity”
efficiently. Readers familiar with rigidity theory or not interested in the technical details can just
read Theorem 4 (which gives an efficiently checkable condition for rigidity in R2 ), the definition
of redundant rigidity (rigidity after removal of any one edge), Theorem 6 and then proceed to next
section. We refer the interested reader to [27] for an in-depth reference on this topic.
  As we have already stated, a d-dimensional point formation Fp is globally rigid if each d-
dimensional point formation Fq with the same graph and distance function as Fp is congruent to
Fp . In order to clearly present properties of global rigidity, we need several other mathematical
concepts whose roots can be found in the rich classical theory of rigid structures.


A. Rigidity
  Let Fp be a d-dimensional point formation, with the distance function measuring all edges in
L, δ : IRnd → IRk . We are interested in all possible formations with the same distances, that is, in
δ −1 (δ(p)). This is a smooth manifold in IRnd [51] and we want to know whether it contains only
points congruent to p. Our best tool for studying this manifold its tangent space and the matrix
equation defining this tangent space with a linearized version of the distance constraints.
  For each edge (i, j) ∈ L, the distance equation (pi − pj )T (pi − pj ) = δ(i, j)2 generates the
corresponding linear equation
                                          (pi − pj )T (ṗi − ṗj ) = 0

in the unknown vector (ṗ1 , ṗ2 , . . . , ṗn ). If a vector satisfies all these equations, then it lies in the
tangent space. This entire system is written as a matrix equation:

                                                R(Fp )ṗ = 0,                                               (1)

where ṗ = column (ṗ1 , ṗ2 , . . . , ṗn ), and R(Fp ) is the specially structured k × dn array called the
rigidity matrix of the formation. In structural engineering and mathematics, the solutions ṗ are
called first-order flexes (infinitesimal flexes, or virtual velocities) [51], [60], [61].
  The tangent vectors to the congruences of the space IRd generate a subspace of trivial solutions,
called the trivial flexes. In the plane, provided that we have at least two distinct points, this space
                                                    8
has dimension 3, generated by two translations and the tangent vector to a rotation about the origin.
In 3-space, if we have three non-collinear points, this space has dimension 6, generated by three
translations along the axes and the derivatives of three rotations about the three axes though the
origin.
  Definition 1: If the trivial flexes are the entire space of first-order flexes, the formation is first-
order rigid.
In short, provided we have at least three vertices [51], [61]:

  Theorem 2: Assume Fp is a formation with at least d nodes in d-space,
                                          
                                           2n − 3 if d = 2
                                          
                            rank R(Fp ) ≤
                                           3n − 6 if d = 3.
                                          

The formation Fp in the plane is first-order rigid if and only if rank R(Fp ) = 2n − 3. The formation
Fp in 3-space is first-order rigid if and only if rank R(Fp ) = 3n − 6.

  It is easy to see from the form of the rigidity matrix that the entries in R(Fp ) are polynomial
(actually linear) functions of p. Because of this, the values of p for which the rank of R(Fp ) is
below its maximum value form a proper algebraic set in IRdn . This observation lies at the roots of
the following equivalences [60], [61]:

  Theorem 3: Given a formation graph G with n ≥ 2 vertices in the plane (resp. n ≥ 3 vertices
in 3-space) the following are equivalent:
  1) for some formation Fp with this graph, rank R(Fp ) = 2n − 3 (resp. rank R(Fp ) = 3n − 6 in
      3-space);
  2) for all q ∈ IR2n in an open neighborhood of p, the formation Fq on the graph G is first-order
      rigid in the plane (resp. q ∈ IR3n , Fq is first-order rigid in 3-space);
  3) for all q in an open dense subset of IR2n , the formation Fq on the same graph G is first-order
      rigid in the plane (resp. open dense subset of IR3n , Fq is first-order rigid in 3-space).

  When property 3) holds, we say that the graph G of Fp is generically rigid in the space. It is well
known that first-order rigidity implies all of the other standard forms of rigidity for a formation,
but the converse can fail [21], [51], [60]. For readers thinking of other concepts of rigidity, we
point out that if one of these alternative forms of rigidity holds for a non-empty open set, then all
of the properties in Theorem 3 hold [51], [60].
                                                   9
   For the plane we have a strong combinatorial characterization of the generically rigid graphs.
We note that this leads to a fast O(|V |2 ) algorithm for generic rigidity testing [29].

   Theorem 4 (Laman [40]): A graph G = (V, L) with n vertices is generically rigid in IR2 if and
only if L contains a subset E consisting of 2n − 3 edges with the property that for any nonempty
subset E ′ ⊂ E, the number of edges in E ′ cannot exceed 2n′ − 3 where n′ is the number of vertices
of G which are endpoints of edges in E ′ .

   There is no comparable complete result for 3-space, and no known polynomial time algorithm,
though there are useful partial results [60], [61].


B. Conditions for Global Rigidity
   We are interested in the stronger concept of generic global rigidity. This concept is intimately
related with first-order rigidity. If the formation Fp is not first-order rigid, there is a non-trivial
first-order flex ṗ that does not come from a congruence. This is enough to guarantee that a small
perturbation will create a formation that is not globally rigid.

   Theorem 5 (Averaging Theorem [60], [61]): Given a non-degenerate formation Fp with a non-
trivial flex q̇, the formations Fp+tq̇ and Fp−tq̇ on the same graph, for all t > 0, have the same edge
lengths for all links but are not congruent.

   We say that a formation Fq is generically globally rigid if every sufficiently small perturbation
q of p creates a globally rigid formation Fq . The result above shows that any non-degenerate
generically globally rigid formation Fp must be first-order rigid. However, as Fig. 1 illustrates, the
converse is not true.

                                                        d                       d         c



                                        a                       b        a                b



                                                            c
                                                  (a)                               (b)


Fig. 1.   Two first-order rigid formations with the same graph and the same distance values.


                                                                    10
   A graph G = {V, L} with n vertices is generically globally rigid in IRd if there is an open dense
set of points p ∈ IRdn at which Fp is a globally rigid formation with link set L. In the plane, a
recent result gives a complete characterization of generically globally rigid graphs. To introduce
the result, we first review the definitions of k-connectivity and redundant rigidity.
   A graph G is k-connected if it remains connected upon removal of any set of < k vertices.
The k-connectivity of a complete graph with n vertices is defined to be n − 1. A simple mental
check also confirms that for more than d + 1 vertices in dimension d, we need at least d + 1 vertex
connectivity, to avoid a reflection of one component through a mirror placed on a disconnecting
set of size d.
   A graph G is redundantly rigid in IRd if the removal of any single edge results in a graph that is
also generically rigid in IRd . Fig. 2 shows a graph that is not redundantly rigid. As Fig. 3 suggests,
we need the graph to be generically redundantly rigid to ensure generic global rigidity.

                                             b                      b’                   b

                                                         a’                                           c’
                                                                                a
                                                                                             c
                                     a           c             c’                                      a’
                                                                                    b’


Fig. 2.   An example from [29] showing a rigid 3-connected graph with two realizations in the plane. If edge (a, a′ ) is removed,
triangle a′ b′ c′ swings along a path until the distance (a, a′ ) is the same as it originally was.




                                                                     a


                                                     b
                                                                                         e


                                                     c                         d

Fig. 3.   A globally rigid formation in the plane.



   Theorem 6 ( [34]): A graph G with n ≥ 4 vertices is generically globally rigid in IR2 if and
only if it is 3-connected and redundantly rigid in IR2 .
                                                 11
  Notice that to actually carry out a test to decide whether or not a given graph G is generically
globally rigid in IR2 , one must establish that it is both 3-connected and redundantly rigid in IR2 .
Various tests for 3-connectivity are known, and we refer the reader to [33], [43] for details including
measures of the complexity of the tests involved. Tests for redundant rigidity in IR2 have been
derived [29] based on variants of Laman’s theorem [40].
  Since these properties are also required for even a non-empty open set of globally rigid formations
in the plane, we can see that the existence of one generically globally rigid formation Fp implies
the graph is generically globally rigid. In 3-space, whether having one generically globally rigid
formation is enough to show that the graph is generically globally rigid is an open question [13].
  As with generic rigidity, we do not have a generalization of Theorem 6 to higher dimensions.
However, it extends as a necessary but not sufficient condition.

  Theorem 7 ( [14], [29]): If a graph G with more than d + 1 vertices is generically globally rigid
in d-space, then G is redundantly rigid and at least d + 1 connected. In all dimensions d ≥ 3, there
are redundantly rigid and at least d + 1 connected graphs that are not generically globally rigid.


        IV. I NDUCTIVE C ONSTRUCTION OF G ENERICALLY G LOBALLY R IGID G RAPHS
  It is possible to derive useful sufficient conditions and inductive constructions for generically
globally rigid graphs (i.e., solvable) in spaces of all dimensions [14], [21]. Such constructions can
be useful in identifying and constructing uniquely localizable networks.
  One simple construction inserts new nodes of degree d+1 into existing generically globally rigid
formations to create larger generically globally rigid formations. Since we will use this construction
later, we give some formal definitions using the term ‘trilateration’ from the plane as a general
term.

  Lemma 2: Given a generically globally rigid point formation Fp , and a new point p0 linked
to d + 1 nodes p1 , ...pd+1 of Fp , in general position, then the extended point formation F̄p+p0 is
generically globally rigid.
     Proof: Consider any location for the distances in F̄p+p0 . We show that the location of p0 is
unique, given these prior locations.
  We first give the proof in R2 , where Fp has three non-collinear points pa , pb , pc . We have the
distances from p0 to these three points. The distances from the first two points, pa , pb , define two
intersections of corresponding circles centered at pa and pb . The distances from any third point pc
                                                 12
to these two solutions are different, since pc is not on the line through pa , pb . Therefore there is a
unique position for p0 for the given distance to pc .
  The same argument works in all dimensions, starting with the two points of intersection for d
spheres with centers in general position.
  Now, consider a second formation F̄p+q0 with the same link lengths as F̄p+p0 . Since the generically
globally rigid formation Fp is contained in this second extended formation, the location of its nodes
is unique, up to congruence. The unique congruence T defined by the d + 1 general position points
of attachment induces a position T (p0 ) that satisfies our construction. Since the constructed point
was unique, we conclude that T (p0 ) = q0 and the two extended formations are congruent. We
conclude that the extended formation is globally rigid.
  The general position property used is stable under small perturbations of p. Therefore the global
rigidity holds for all small perturbations and the extended formation is generically globally rigid.


  For the network setting in 2 dimensions, we can start with the globally rigid formation on m ≥ 3
beacons as Fpm . We can then sequentially add new nodes as points pm+1 , . . . , pn , each along with 3
edges to distinct nodes in the preceding formation, to extend the preceding formation. Provided that
all sets of points which will be used in extensions are in general position, we create a generically
globally rigid formation F̄p with n points. This process can be worded in terms of generically
globally rigid graphs.
  Definition 2: A trilateration extension in dimension d of a graph G = (V, E), where |V | ≥ d + 1
produces a new graph G′ = (V ∪ {v}, E ∪ {(v, w1 ), . . . , (v, wd+1 )}), where v ∈
                                                                                 / V , and wi ∈ V .
  Definition 3: A trilaterative ordering in dimension d for a graph G is an ordering of the vertices
1, . . . , d + 1, d + 2, . . . n such that Kd+1 , the complete graph on the initial vertices, is in G, and from
every vertex j > d + 1, there are at least d + 1 edges to vertices earlier in the sequence. Graphs for
which a trilaterative ordering exists in dimension d are called trilateration graphs in dimension d.

  Theorem 8: Trilateration graphs in dimension d are generically globally rigid in dimension d.
     Proof: Any formation on the complete graph on d+1 vertices is generically globally rigid if the
points are in general position. We take such a formation. We can then apply Lemma 2 to add each
point along the trilaterative ordering, with its guaranteed d + 1 edges, to create a larger generically
globally rigid formation with all points in general position. We can then add any additional edges
beyond the d + 1 needed, without changing the generic global rigidity of the extended formation.
                                             13
  Repeated application of this leads to a generically globally rigid formation on the whole graph.
Since the conditions of being in general position apply to an open dense subset of the space, we
conclude that the graph is generically globally rigid.

  A trilateration graph G may have more than one trilaterative ordering and even more than one
seed — the initial complete graph Kd+1 . We will look at algorithmic aspects of trilateration graphs
in the next section.

                       V. C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF L OCALIZATION
  We have seen in preceding sections that global rigidity is a necessary condition for the solvability
of network localization. We will now move from the decision problem of solvability to an associated
search problem, graph realization.
  Specifically, we define the graph realization problem as the problem of assigning coordinates to
vertices of a weighted graph G so that the edge weight of every edge (i, j) equals the distance
between the points assigned to vertices i and j. Note that a given graph may not be realizable under
a particular set of edge weights. In the context of network localization, the graphs under study are
the grounded graphs associated with network point formations.

A. Realizing Globally Rigid Graphs
  Although global rigidity testing in the plane is computable in polynomial time, Saxe has shown
that testing the realizability of weighted graphs is NP-hard [54]. Below, we will argue that realizing
a graph is still hard, even if it is known that the graph is globally rigid and that it has a realization.
The objective of this subsection is to build intuitive results. In the next subsection we will conduct
a formal reduction and discuss the implications. Note that we will restrict ourselves to the plane
in this section.
  Recall that the SET-PARTITION-SEARCH problem is the following: Given a set of numbers S,
find a partition of S as A ∪ S − A so that the sums of the numbers in the two sets are equal. We
first prove a useful NP-hardness result for the SET-PARTITION-SEARCH problem.

  Claim 1: Given a set S for which the existence of a set partition is guaranteed, the problem of
finding a set partition is still NP-hard.
     Proof: Assume that algorithm A solves set-partition-search. Let S be a set of numbers for
which it is unknown whether there is a set-partition. Run A on input S for time t equal to the
running time of A on a valid input of size |S|.
                                                   14
   If A has not terminated, then S has no set-partition. If A has terminated, then S has a set-
partition if and only the output of A is a set-partition of S. Since set-partition is NP-complete,
set-partition-search is NP-hard.

   We now show another result which will prove to be useful. Fig. 4 shows a particular realization
of the wheel graph W6 .




Fig. 4.   Wheel graph W6 .




   Claim 2: The wheel graph Wn is globally rigid.
      Proof: We will refer to nodes in the cycle, Cn−1 , as rim nodes, the central node as the hub,
an edge between the hub and a rim node as a spoke, and an edge between two rim nodes as a rim
edge.
   If we remove two rim vertices, the graph remains connected through the hub. If we remove the
hub and one rim vertex, the graph remains a connected path on the remaining vertices. Therefore
removing two vertices does not disconnect the graph, and it is 3-connected.
   As Lemma 2.1 of [6] observes, a wheel is a minimally redundantly rigid graph for the plane.
By Theorem 6, it is generically globally rigid.

   We now analyze the complexity of realization of globally rigid graphs. A realistic formulation
of the realization problem requires that the edge lengths be noisy measurements of underlying
edge lengths subject to bounded errors. Note that with probability 1, these error-corrupted edge
lengths will not correspond to realizable weights. In this case, the realization problem becomes
an approximation problem; namely, finding an assignment of coordinates for the graph vertices so
that the resulting discrepancies with the noisy weights are below a tolerance parameter. Below, we
use a reduction from set partition to show that realization of globally rigid weighted graphs with
                                                  15
realizable i.e., exact, edge weights is still hard. To construct the reduction, we use real numbers,
which could potentially be irrational. The formal proof in the next subsection does not need to use
real numbers.
  Assume we have an algorithm A that takes as input a realizable globally rigid weighted graph and
outputs the unique realization. Consider a set of n positive rational numbers S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sn },
for which a set-partition exists, scaled without loss of generality such that ni=1 si = π/2. Let us
                                                                             P

now label the nodes of Wn+1 as follows: we label the hub 0, and the rim nodes 1 through n, where
there is an edge from i to i + 1 for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n − 1} and from n to 1. We will refer to the
spoke from 0 to i as spokei .
  Let us now construct a weighted version of Wn+1 . Let the weight of each spoke be r, where r
is a positive rational number. Let the weight of the rim edge between node i and node i + 1 for
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n − 1} be 2r sin(si /2), and let the weight of the rim edge between node n and node 1
be 2r sin(sn /2). We now argue that this weighted version of Wn+1 , call it W′n+1 , has a realization
in the plane.
  If we imagine si as the modulus of the angle between spokei and spokei+1 for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n−1}
and sn as the modulus of the angle between spoken and spoke1 in a realization of Wn+1 , we can
determine a set of edge weights. Fix the weight of each spoke to be r, where r is a positive real
number. Then the weight of the rim edge between node i and node i+1 for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n−1} must
be 2r sin(si /2), and the weight of the rim edge between node n and node 1 must be 2r sin(sn /2).
Since S has a set partition, we can form a cycle of these chords in the plane. Therefore the wheel
graph with these edge weights, W′n+1 has a realization.
  Note that despite the fact that the spokes might be inserted sequentially, it is not true that the
ends of the spokes on the circumference necessarily occur sequentially as one moves continuously
around the rim. The graph will in general fold up like a fan. In addition, note that the upper bound
on the sum of the si ensures that in progressing through the cycle, there can be no net rotation
around the hub, i.e., the angles corresponding to clockwise rotation and those to counter clockwise
rotation do not differ by some nonzero multiple of 2π.
  Suppose we have an efficient algorithm A for graph realization. We run the algorithm on
the realizable globally rigid weighted graph W′n+1 to obtain a realization. From this realization,
determine whether it is clockwise or counter-clockwise to rotate spokei to spokei+1 for i ∈
{1, . . . , n − 1} and from spoken to spoke1 . By construction, the set of angles corresponding to

                                                   16
clockwise rotation and that of counter-clockwise rotation form a set-partition of S.
  This procedure solves set-partition-search with one call to a graph realization algorithm and
polynomial time additional computation. Since set-partition-search is NP-hard, realizable globally
rigid weighted graph realization in the plane is NP-hard.


B. Localization complexity for unit disk graphs
  The preceding subsection considers arbitrary globally rigid graphs. However, the construction
relies on a “folding fan” construction in which pairs of nodes close to each other in the unique
realization may possibly not have an edge between them. We consider a special class of graphs
called unit disk graphs, where a distance measurement is present between any pair of sensors if
they are within some disk radius parameter r of each other. We will show that even when limited
to this idealized class of graph, localization is still NP-hard. To avoid precision issues involving
irrational distances, below we assume that the input to the problem is presented with the distances
squared. If we make the further assumption that all sensors have integer coordinates, all distances
will be integers as well.
  We consider a decision version of the localization problem, which we call UNIT DISK GRAPH
RECONSTRUCTION. This problem essentially asks if a particular graph with given edge lengths
can be physically realized as a unit disk graph with a given disk radius in two dimensions. A
similar result is obtained by Breu and Kirkpatrick in [9]. Our objective in this paper is to further
connect to network localization.
  The input is a graph G where each edge uv of G is labeled with an integer ℓ2uv , the square of
its length, together with an integer r2 that is the square of the radius of a unit disk. The output
is “yes” or “no” depending on whether there exists a set of points in R2 such that the distance
between u and v is ℓuv whenever uv is an edge in G and exceeds r whenever uv is not an edge
in G.
  Our main result is that UNIT DISK GRAPH RECONSTRUCTION is NP-hard, based on a
reduction from the NP-hard problem CIRCUIT SATISFIABILITY [24]. The constructed graph for
a circuit with m wires has O(m2 ) vertices and O(m2 ) edges, and the number of solutions to the
resulting localization problem is equal to the number of satisfying assignments for the circuit. In
each solution to the localization problem, the points can be placed at integer coordinates, and the
entire graph fits in an O(m)-by-O(m) rectangle, where the constants hidden by the asymptotic

                                                  17
notation are small. The construction also permits a constant fraction of the nodes to be placed at
known locations.
  Formally, we show:
  Theorem 9: There is a polynomial-time reduction from CIRCUIT SATISFIABILITY to UNIT
DISK GRAPH RECONSTRUCTION, in which there is a one-to-one correspondence between
satisfying assignments to the circuit and solutions to the resulting localization problem.
  The proof of Theorem 9 depends on a sequence of constructions of logical gates and is given
by Aspnes et al. in [5]. An application of the theorem to sparse networks shows that localization
is hard. By sparse networks, we mean networks where the number of known distance pairs grows
only linearly in the number of nodes. Sparse networks are of great importance, because in the limit
as a network with bounded communication range and fixed sensor density grows, the number of
known distance pairs grows only linearly in the number of nodes.
  Corollary 1: There is no efficient algorithm that solves the localization problem for sparse sensor
networks in the worst case unless P=NP.
     Proof: Suppose that we have a polynomial-time algorithm that takes as input the distances
between sensors from an actual placement in R2 , and recovers the original position of the sensors
(relative to each other, or to an appropriate set of beacons). Such an algorithm can be used to
solve UNIT DISK GRAPH RECONSTRUCTION by applying it to an instance of the problem
(that may or may not have a solution). After reaching its polynomial time bound, the algorithm
will either have returned a solution or not. In the first case, we can check if the solution returned is
consistent with the distance constraints in the UNIT DISK GRAPH RECONSTRUCTION instance
in polynomial time, and accept if and only if the check succeeds. In the second case, we can
reject the instance. In both cases we have returned the correct answer for UNIT DISK GRAPH
RECONSTRUCTION.
  It might appear that this result depends on the possibility of ambiguous reconstructions, where
the position of some points is not fully determined by the known distances. However, if we allow
randomized reconstruction algorithms, a similar result holds even for graphs that have unique
reconstructions. Below RP denotes the class of randomized polynomial-time algorithms [25].
  Corollary 2: There is no efficient randomized algorithm that solves the localization problem for
sparse sensor networks that have unique reconstructions unless RP=NP.
     Proof: The proof of this claim is by use of the well-known construction of Valiant and Vazirani,

                                                  18
which gives a randomized Turing reduction from 3SAT to UNIQUE SATISFIABILITY [58]. The
essential idea of this reduction is that randomly fixing some of the inputs to the 3SAT problem
reduces the number of potential solutions, and repeating the process eventually produces a 3SAT
instance with a unique solution with high probability.
  Finally, because the graph constructed in the proof of Theorem 9 uses only points with integer
coordinates, even an approximate solution that positions each point to within a distance ǫ < 1/2 of
its correct location can be used to find the exact locations of all points by rounding each coordinate
to the nearest integer. Since the construction uses a fixed value for the unit disk radius r (the natural
scale factor for the problem), we have
  Corollary 3: The results of Corollary 1 and Corollary 2 continue to hold even for algorithms
that return an approximate location for each point, provided the approximate location is within ǫ · r
of the correct location, where ǫ is a fixed constant.
  What we do not know at present is whether these results continue to hold for solutions that have
large positional errors but that give edge lengths close to those in the input. Our suspicion is that
edge-length errors accumulate at most polynomially across the graph, but we have not yet carried
out the error analysis necessary to prove this. If our suspicion is correct, we would have:
  Conjecture 1: The results of Corollary 1 and Corollary 2 continue to hold even for algorithms
that return an approximate location for each point, provided the relative error in edge length for
each edge is bounded by ǫ/nc for some fixed constant c.


C. Global/Distributed Optimization for Localization
  The preceding subsections have shown that the computational complexity of network localization
is likely to be high. In practice, one way to solve the general localization problem is to formulate
it as an optimization problem. Specifically, realization of a graph G = (V, E) with edge weight
function δ(i, j) can be formulated as a global optimization over vectors of points {x1 , x2 , . . . , x|V | }
of the following form,
                                             X
                                minimize              (δ(i, j)− k xi − xj k)2 .
                                            (i,j)∈E



  This formulation of the problem has been used by biologists studying molecular conforma-
tion [15]. Because such optimization is computationally expensive, strategies such as divide-and-
conquer [30] and objective function smoothing [45] have been proposed. Recently, in [7], Biswas
                                              19
and Ye show that network localization in unit disk graphs can be formulated as a semidefinite
programming problem and thus can be efficiently solved. A condition of their algorithm, however, is
that the graphs are densely connected. More specifically, their algorithm requires that Ω(n2 ) pairs of
nodes know their relative distances, where n is the number of sensor nodes in the network. However,
as we see from the preceding section, for a general network, it is enough for the localization process
to have a unique solution when certain O(n) pairs of nodes know their distances.
  In the context of network localization, distributed optimization algorithms may be desirable. In
this case, algorithms such as [30] may be applied by dividing the global network into small globally
rigid sub-components [36] (clusters) to reduce overall complexity. Each cluster computes its relative
localization using some optimization technique. Then the global localization can be achieved by
merging the localizations of individual components. With these algorithms, a tradeoff will likely
emerge between the advantage of small cluster size and the disadvantage of having to reconcile a
large number of localized clusters.


D. Realizing Trilateration Graphs
  Although realization of general globally rigid graphs is hard, we have already seen a class
of globally rigid graphs that are computationally efficient to realize. In what follows, we define
trilateration to be the operation whereby a node with known distances to three other nodes in
general position determines its own position in terms of the positions of those three neighbors. We
assume that this operation is efficiently computable.

  Theorem 10: A trilateration graph G = (V, E) with realizable edge weights is realizable in a
polynomial number of trilaterations.
     Proof: There is a sequence of trilateration extensions that result in G when applied to K3 .
If we know a seed of G, then we can do the following: Localize one of the nodes of the seed
at the origin, another on the positive x-axis, and the remaining node at a position with a positive
y coordinate. At each step, we can calculate positions for all unlocalized nodes with edges to
three localized nodes. Because G is a trilateration graph, we are guaranteed to be able to calculate
positions for all nodes with at most |V | − 3 trilaterations.
                                                                       n
                                                                        
  If we do not know any seed of G, we can guess it in at most          3
                                                                            tries, which is polynomial.
A guess is correct if and only if the above procedure succeeds in localizing all nodes in a linear
number of steps. Hence, we can realize a trilateration graph in a polynomial number of steps.
                                                  20
  As we shall see, there are scenarios in which it is reasonable to assume that we know a seed of
the trilateration graph, and in these cases, the linear algorithm will be applicable.


             VI. L OCALIZATION IN R ANDOM G EOMETRIC G RAPHS IN THE P LANE
  In previous sections, we presented theory for localization of general networks. In this section, we
specialize to the setting of sensor networks with a large number of randomly distributed sensors
and explore the average case behavior of a specific localization algorithm. An abstraction that
corresponds well to this setting is the random geometric graph.


A. Definition and Properties of Random Geometric Graphs
  We define random geometric graphs in terms of point formations.
  Definition 4: Given n ∈ N and r ∈ [0, 1], the random geometric graphs Gn (r) are the graphs
associated with two dimensional point formations Fp with all links of length less than r, where
p = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } is a set of points in [0, 1]2 generated by a two dimensional Poisson point
process of intensity n.
  The parameters of the model, n and r, correspond respectively to the physical parameters of
sensor density and sensing radius.
  We next review some useful properties of the connectivity of Gn (r). Note that the results we
present in this section are asymptotic and that because of this, we neglect collinearity as a low
probability phenomenon.
  As in the case of the Erdös-Rényi random graph model [8], there is a phase transition in the
random geometric graph model at which the graph becomes connected with high probability [4].
Penrose [48] generalizes this to k-connectivity with the result that if Gn (r) has a minimum vertex
degree of k then with high probability Gn (r) is k-connected.
                                                     q
                                                         log n
  Since it is was proved in [41] that for some r ∈ O(      n
                                                               ), Gn (r) asymptotically has a minimum
                                                                q
                                                                   log n
vertex degree of k for k ∈ O(1) with high probability, r ∈ O(        n
                                                                         ) can also ensure k-connectivity.


B. Global Rigidity of Random Geometric Graphs
  Recalling that 3-connectivity is a necessary condition for global rigidity, and using a recent
result that 6-connectivity is sufficient for global rigidityq
                                                            in the plane [34], we conclude that Gn (r)
                                                            log n
is globally rigid with high probability for some r ∈ O(       n
                                                                  ).
                                                 21
   Next we have the following interesting result:
   Theorem 11: If G = (V, E) is 2-connected, then the graph G2 = (V, E ∪ E 2 ), where E 2 is the
set of edges between endpoints of paths consisting of two edges in G, is globally rigid.
      Proof:
   Let G = (V, E) be 2-connected. Take any two nodes u and v in V . Since there are at least two
node-disjoint paths from u to v, they lie on a cycle. Let us denote the cycle of n nodes by Cn . We
will show that Cn2 is globally rigid, and from this, it follows that the distance between every pair
of nodes in V is fixed in G2 , i.e., G2 is globally rigid.
   By a result from [6], every globally rigid graph has a globally rigid subgraph that can be obtained
from K4 by a sequence of node addition operations, termed edge splitting. Edge splitting preserves
global rigidity, and in it, a new node v is added by replacing an existing edge (u, w) by edges (u, v)
and (v, w), and adding an edge (v, z) for some z 6= u, v. We show that Cn2 is globally rigid by
constructing a class of globally rigid graphs Cn′ which are spanning subgraphs of Cn2 , as illustrated
in Fig. 5.

                                                       5                                               6
                                                                        5         6
                           4           1                                                      5                 7
                                           4                   1
                                                                   4                  1
                                                                                          4                         1


                          3            2       3           2            3         2               3         2
                               C4′                 C5′                      C6′                       C7′
                                                       5                                               6
                                                                        5         6
                           4           1                                                      5                 7
                                           4                   1
                                                                   4                  1
                                                                                          4                         1


                          3            2       3           2            3         2               3         2
                               C42                 C52                      C62                       C72



Fig. 5.   In the top row are the globally rigid Cn′ graphs, n = 4, 5, 6, 7. The dotted edge connects a newly added node n to node
n − 2. Note that Cn′ is a spanning subgraph of Cn2 .



   Starting from K4 , we label the nodes 1 . . . 4 and add nodes sequentially. In the n − 4th step, we
insert a node n by adding an edge (n, n − 2), and subdividing the edge (n − 1, 1) by replacing
it with (n − 1, n) and (n, 1). The resulting graph Cn′ is globally rigid. It is easy to see that Cn′
is a spanning subgraph of Cn2 for all n ≥ 4. Since adding edges to a globally rigid graph cannot
result in a non-globally rigid graph, Cn2 is globally rigid. Hence, if G is biconnected, the distance
                                                                   22
between all pairs of nodes is fixed in G2 , and G2 is globally rigid.


   For random geometric graphs, the preceding theorem means that Gn (2r) is globally rigid with
at least the probability that Gn (r) is 2-connected. This result is extended and related results for
3-space and trilateration graphs proven in recent work by Anderson et al. in [3]
   For some large n and δ ∈ (0, 1), let ri denote the smallest radius at which Gn (r) becomes
i-connected with probability 1 − δ and let rg denote the radius at which it becomes globally rigid
with probability 1 − δ. Note that r2 ≤ r3 ≤ rg ≤ r6 and that rg ≤ 2r2 . This behavior is illustrated
in Fig. 6.


                               1
                             1−δ
                               probability




                                                                                         ?        ?
                                   0
                                             sensing radius   r2         r3         rg       r6
                                                                                                       2r2


Fig. 6.    Probability that Gn (r) is k-connected. Dotted line represents the probability that Gn (r) is globally rigid.




C. Realization of Random Geometric Graphs
   We now explore conditions for Gn (r) to yield an efficient realization computation 1 .
                          nr                        2
   Theorem 12: If limn→∞ log n
                               > 8, with high probability, Gn (r) is a trilateration graph.
                                        cn
         Proof: Partition [0, 1]2 into log n
                                             square cells of equal size where 8 log n/nr2 < c < 1. That
such a c exists is assured by the theorem hypothesis. Note that with high probability, every cell

  1
      with respect to a particular algorithm
                                                                   23
contains at least three nodes. This is because if A is the area of a square, the probability it contains
no nodes, one node, or two nodes is e−nA , nAe−nA and (1/2)(nA)2 e−nA . When A = logn/cn,
the sum of these three probabilities, call it q(n), goes to zero as n goes to infinity. In fact, it is
                  cn
easily seen that log n
                       q(n) goes to zero as n goes to infinity, from which one can argue that every
                least three nodes with probability approaching 1 as n goes to infinity. Additionally,
cell contains atq
            √
since r > 2 2 logn n , every node has edges between itself and all nodes in its own cell and those
adjacent cells sharing a corner or edge with its cell.
  Starting from some cell we label as 0, we iteratively label every cell in [0, 1]2 . In step i ∈
           q
             cn
{1, . . . , log n
                  }, we label with i every unlabelled cell that adjoins a cell labelled i − 1 horizontally,
vertically, or diagonally. We will refer to the union of all cells with the same label i as a layer, Li .
  We now iteratively label all n nodes in the grid such that each node has a unique label. In step
−1, we choose three nodes in L0 and label them 1, 2, and 3. In step 0, we label the rest of the
nodes in L0 sequentially with numbers greater than 3. In step i, we label sequentially all nodes in
Li with numbers larger than every label in Li−1 .
  Every node in L0 with a label greater than three has edges to 1, 2, and 3. By construction, a
node labelled m in Li , i > 0 has edges to at least three nodes in Li−1 with labels less than m.
Thus we have a trilaterative ordering from Definition 3, and Gn (r) is a trilateration graph.


  An intuitive argument that perhaps yields more insight into the previous result is the following.
In the limit of large n, assume that nodes 1, 2, and 3 can be considered to occur at a single point
p0 . If every node in Gn (r) is connected to three other nodes closer than itself to p0 , then Gn (r) has
a trilaterative ordering. Since p0 can be in any direction from an arbitrary point, this is assured in
the event that every node has three neighbors in any 120◦ sector of the circle with radius r about
it, or at least nine neighbors. Denoting by rt the radius at which Gn (r) has probability 1 − δ of
being a trilateration graph, we suspect that rt approaches r9 from above in the limit of large n.
  These results immediately yield insight into the complexity of realizing Gn (r).
                                q
  Theorem 13: For some r ∈ O( logn n ), if the positions of three nodes with edges to each other
are known, then with high probability, a realization of Gn (r) is computable in linear time.
     Proof: By the proof of Theorem 12, the three nodes with known positions form the seed of a
spanning trilateration graph G with high probability. By Theorem 10, the positions of all nodes in
G can be computed in linear time. Since Gn (r) is spanned by G, it can be realized in linear time.
                                              24
D. Localization in Random Sensor Networks
   We now study a simple localization protocol for random sensor networks we call ITP in Fig. 7.
Theorem 13 allows us to analyze the effectiveness of our procedure.


                                       ⊲ Sensors have two modes: localized and unlocalized
                                       ⊲ Sensors determine distance from heard transmitter
                                       ⊲ All sensors are pre-placed and plugged-in


                                       Localized mode:
                                               Broadcast position
                                       Unlocalized mode:
                                               Listen for broadcast
                                               if broadcast from (x,y) heard
                                                 Determine distance to (x,y)
                                               if three broadcasts heard
                                                 Determine position
                                                 Switch to localized mode



Fig. 7.   The iterative trilateration protocol (ITP).



   Definition 5: A random sensornet Sn (r) is a sensornet of n sensors with sensing radius r placed
at random on [0, 1]2 by a two-dimensional Poisson point process. A beacon is a sensor that knows
its position.
   One could define a random sensornet in terms of a uniform distribution over [0, 1]2 , but we do
not consider this case.
  The following results are summarized in Table I.
                              q
  Claim 3: For some r ∈ O( logn n ), with high probability, all sensors in Sn (r) will have deter-
                                    q
mined their positions with ITP by O( logn n ) time if three beacons are placed anywhere in [0, 1]2
so that they are in sensing range of each other.
      Proof: We set r and partition [0, 1]2 into square cells as in the proof of Theorem 12. We will
now show that we can have an entire grid cell within range of the three beacons. Let the beacons
                                              25
lie at points P1 , P2 , and P3 . We know that d(Pi , Pj ) ≤ r, for i 6= j. Consider the smallest circle C
enclosing the three beacons. Assume the center of C is Pc .
  Consider the case that P1 , P2 , and P3 are all are on C. We can bound the radius R of C as
follows. Consider the angles of the three sectors P1 Pc P2 , P2 Pc P3 , and P3 Pc P1 , all less than 180◦ .
  For each Pi Pc Pj , to guarantee that d(Pi , Pj ) ≤ r, we have the constraint that R ≤ 2sin(PirPc Pj /2) .
The most restrictive of these contraints on R is the one corresponding to the largest Pi Pc Pj , which
is at most 180◦ . Thus, we have that R ≤ r/2. Now we draw a circle C ′ centered at Pc with radius
(1 − 1/2)r. Using the triangle inequality we have that the distance from Pi to any point inside C ′
is less than or equal to (1/2)r + (1 − 1/2)r = r.
  The case that only two of P1 , P2 , and P3 are on C is similar since we also have that R ≤ r/2.
  Thus we have a circular area of Θ(r2 ) wholly within range of the three beacons. We offset the
grid partition such that an entire cell is within this area and thus localized in the first time-step.
We label this cell 0 and proceed with labelling the remaining cells as in the proof of Theorem 12.
We say that a layer is localized when all sensors in that layer have determined their positions.
Assuming ITP broadcast, distance calculation, and trilateration take place in constant time, L0 will
be localized in a single constant-time step because all nodes contained therein are connected to
the three beacons. Additionally, given Li localized, ITP will localize Li+1 in a single constant-time
                                                           q
step. Therefore, all layers will be localized in at most O( logn n ) steps and our claim is established.


                               q
                                   log n
  Claim 4: For some r ∈ O(           n
                                         ), with high probability, all sensors in Sn (r) can determine their
                                                               √
positions with ITP and will have done so by expected time of O( log n) if beacons are placed on
[0, 1]2 by a Poisson point process of intensity O(n/ log n).
     Proof: We set r and partition [0, 1]2 into square cells of area A as in the proof of Theorem 12.
The Poisson point process places beacons into each cell at a rate λ ∝ nA/ log n ∈ O(1). Therefore,
the probability that a cell contains at least three beacons is a constant p which is independent of n.
  The probability that all cells contain less than three beacons is q O(n/logn) , where q = 1 − p, so
some cell contains at least three beacons with high probability, and consequently, all sensors can
localize as in claim 3.
  We now bound the expected time it takes for every sensor to localize given some cell contains
three beacons. We say a cell is localized if every sensor it contains has determined its position. In a
single constant-time step, ITP localizes a cell if it contains three beacons or if any of its neighbors
                                                   26
are localized. Because of this, in what follows we will refer to discretized time rather than steps.
  The probability that a particular cell does not localize by time k is the probability that all cells
                                                                                            2
within a square of cells with side 2k + 1 contain fewer than three beacons, q (2k+1) . The probability
that the last cell to localize does so after a certain time is the same as the probability that at least
one of the cells localizes after that time. More formally, where ti is the time at which square i
localizes, since the total number of cells is O( logn n ), the following is true,
                                                                    n         2
                             P r[max(ti ) > k] ∈ min(1, O(              )q O(k ) ).
                                                                  log n
  Since the time to localize is a positive random variable, we can use the upper tail probabilities
to determine its expected value,
                                              ∞
                                              X                    n         2
                              E[max(ti )] ∈          min(1, O(         )q O(k ) ).
                                               k=0
                                                                 log n

                                 √
  Observing that for some k0 ∈ O( log n − log log n),

                                          n         2
                                   O(         )q O(k ) > 1 ⇐⇒ k < k0 ,
                                        log n
  we see that                                                  ∞
                                           p              n X O(k2 )
                           E[max(ti )] ∈ O( log n) + O(      )    q  .
                                                        log n k=k
                                                                            0
                                                                                      P∞        O(k2 )
  In calculations we will not include here, it can be shown that O( logn n )           k=k0 q            ∈ O(1).
  We have thus shown that with high probability, all sensors will localize in expected time of
  √
O( log n).
                           q
  Claim 5: For some r ∈ O( logn n ), with high probability, all sensors in Sn (r) can determine
their positions and will have determined their positions by O(1) time if beacons are placed on
[0, 1]2 by a Poisson point
                       q process of intensity O(n).
                           log n
     Proof: If r ∈ O(        n
                                 ), the Poisson point process places beacons in the sensing region of a
sensor at rate λ ∝ nr2 ∝ log n. Since we expect O(log n) beacons connected to every sensor, with
high probability, we will have O(1) i.e., at least three beacons connected to every sensor, and all
sensors will localize in O(1) time with high probability.



                                                      27
                                                                      beacons       sensing radius        E[tloc ]
                                                                                        q                  q
                                                                        O(1)          O( logn n )        O( logn n )
                                                                                        q                  √
                                                                      O( logn n )     O( logn n )        O( log n)
                                                                                        q
                                                                        O(n)          O( logn n )           O(1)


                                                                                           TABLE I

                                  LOCALIZATION IN VARIOUS BEACON PLACEMENT SCHEMES .




          VII. S IMULATION S TUDY OF L OCALIZATION IN R ANDOM N ETWORKS IN 3- SPACE
   We simulate random geometric graphs in 3-space by generating points randomly in [0, 1]3 , placing
four beacons in the center of the unit cube within sensing range of each other. We then simulate
ITP by localizing nodes in computational rounds in which we determine positions for all nodes
connected to four nodes with known position. We terminate the simulation when a round does
not determine the position of any node. Note that that while these simulations are in 3-space, the
theory of the previous section for 2-space is indicative of the 3-space results. In our first simulation,
for three values of r, we track the percentage of nodes whose positions can be determined. We
observe in Fig. 8 an increasingly sharp phase transition in the percentage of localizable nodes as
we increase n.
                                       percentage localizable nodes




                                                                          1

                                                                        0.8

                                                                        0.6

                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                     n = 1000
                                                                        0.2                          n = 2000
                                                                                                     n = 4000
                                                                          0
                                                                           0.04     0.08     0.12    0.16       0.2   0.24
                                                                                                radius


Fig. 8.   Percentage of nodes localizable with 4-beacon ITP.



   In our second simulation, we calculate the smallest radius at which the percentage of localizable
nodes is greater than 95%. We see in Fig. 9 behavior similar to the analytical results of the plane
in the preceding section. Note that the analytical asymptotic result more accurately models actual
                                                 28
behavior as n increases. The difference for small n is explained by the contribution of logarithmic
terms in the localization probability that becomes significant when n is small.

                                                                       0.35
                                                                                        measured behavior




                                          phase transition radius
                                                                        0.3          asymptotic prediction
                                                                       0.25
                                                                        0.2
                                                                       0.15
                                                                        0.1
                                                                       0.05
                                                                                 0        1000                   2000
                                                                                         number of nodes


Fig. 9.    Trilateration graph phase transition radius in Gn (r).



   Our last simulations investigate the number of computational rounds necessary to localize all
nodes that can be localized. In Fig. 10, we observe for n = 2000 that the percentage of localized
nodes at a given step increases dramatically with modest increases in sensing radius. Note that
below the phase transition, at r = 0.1, the procedure fails to localize practically any nodes and
completes in four steps. For r straddling the phase transition, Fig. 11 plots the number of steps
before completion. The spike is due to a sudden increase in connectedness above the phase transition
at which the radius is minimal for total localizability.

                                                                         1
                                          percentage localized nodes




                                                                       0.9
                                                                       0.8
                                                                       0.7
                                                                       0.6
                                                                       0.5                             r = 0.1
                                                                       0.4                           r = 0.13
                                                                       0.3                           r = 0.16
                                                                       0.2                           r = 0.19
                                                                       0.1                           r = 0.22
                                                                         0
                                                                             0       5         10            15         20
                                                                                              step


Fig. 10.    Time-evolution of the number of localized nodes.




                                                                             VIII. R ELATED W ORK
   Network localization is after four years of intense research very much still an active field. The
previous approaches can be classified into two types: coarse-grained [10], [11], [28], [42], [50], [57]
                                                 29
                                                             50
                                                             45                   n = 1000




                                       steps to completion
                                                             40                   n = 2000
                                                             35                   n = 4000
                                                             30
                                                             25
                                                             20
                                                             15
                                                             10
                                                              5
                                                              0
                                                               0.08   0.12    0.16      0.2   0.24
                                                                             radius


Fig. 11.   Required steps for algorithm completion.




and fine-grained [1], [7], [12], [18], [37], [44], [46], [47], [49], [52], [53], [56]. The focus of this
paper is fine-grained localization. As we discussed in the Introduction, the previous approaches were
mainly heuristics, and a theoretical foundation was lacking. Eren et al. addressed this problem in a
preliminary form in [20], providing the first theoretical analysis of network localization. Since that
work was originally published, the authors in [44] applied our conditions to produce a localization
algorithm based on trilateration graphs under noisy distance measurements which is effective in
relatively dense networks. Our conditions for unique localizability are also applied in [49] in an
algorithm which uses mobility to obtain distance measurements which result in globally rigid
constraint structures. The algorithm presented in [7] uses semidefinite programming and is effective
in relatively dense overconstrained networks. A technique called multidimensional scaling (MDS),
which requires estimation of the complete distance matrix, is applied in [56], yielding good results
in dense networks. Distances between nodes need not necessarily be used in estimation of the
complete distance matrix, so this approach can be seen either as fine or coarse-grained localization.
The work on fine-grained localization which inspired our research into the fundamental theory
of the problem is [53]. The authors produced an innovative algorithm effective in practice for
sufficiently dense networks, but left open the issues of unique localizability and complexity and
did not necessarily localize all localizable nodes.
   A related problem called molecular conformation has been studied in the chemistry community,
e.g., [2], [30], [45]. However, the focus of these studies is on 3-space. Also, since the structure of
a molecule is given, they do not consider the network construction process.
   One major building block of our analysis is rigidity theory and computational geometry. Rigidity
has been long studied in mathematics and structural engineering (see for example [40], [60], [31],
                                               30
[51], [61]) and has a surprising number of applications in many areas.
  We formally analyzed the performance of network localization in networks of randomly placed
nodes. Even though some researchers have studied random graphs in sensor networks, e.g., [16],
[17], [22], [39], the focus is mainly on routing but not on localization. Phase transitions for
connectivity in random geometric graphs are explored in [41], and motivated some of our research
on phase transitions for localizability in random sensor networks.


                               IX. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
  The unique localization of networks from distance measurements shares a number of features
with work in several other active fields of study: rigidity and global rigidity in frameworks; the
coordination of formations of automonous agents; and geometric constraints in CAD. In this paper,
we have drawn on techniques and results from the first two fields, also combined in some previous
joint work [21], as well as specific results on global rigidity [13], [34]. With these concepts, we were
able to lay a coherent solid foundation for the underlying problem of when a network is uniquely
localizable, for almost all configurations of the points. Specifically, we constructed a formation
and then a graph for each network such that the localization problem for the network is uniquely
solvable, almost always, if and only if the corresponding graph is generically globally rigid. From
these connections, we drew specific results and showed that the trilateration networks are uniquely
localizable for almost all initial locations.
  It should be noted that global rigidity is a graph property linked with the unique localizability
of an entire network. In work by Goldenberg et al. in [26], it was observed that even in networks
with non-globally rigid grounded graphs, there may exist uniquely localizable nodes. A theoretical
investigation of this phenomenon of globally linked nodes was later given by Jordan et al. in [35].
  It also deserves note that as stated, the localization problem with precise distance is not in general
numerically well posed since even if it is solvable with the given data, it may be unsolvable with data
arbitrarily “close” to that which is given. In practical terms, this means that special attention must be
paid to the computation process and to assessing the significance of “approximate solutions.” It also
means that only graphs which are generically globally rigid are capable of having computationally
stable solutions for given data sets. This confirms our choice of conceptual framework for this
problem. However, we comment that even approximate solutions are hard to compute due to the
hardness of the localization problem.

                                                   31
  Specifically, we have shown that the localization problem is NP-hard in the worst case for sparse
graphs unless P=NP or RP=NP, if certain mild forms of approximation are permitted. This worst-
case result for sparse graphs stands in contrast to results that show that localization is possible
for dense graphs [7] or with high probability for random geometric graphs. The open questions
that remain are where the boundary lies between our negative result and these positive results. In
particular:
  •   Is there an efficient algorithm for approximate localization in sparse graphs, either by permitting
      moderate errors on distances or by permitting the algorithm to misplace some small fraction
      of the sensors?
  •   Given that the difficulty of the problem appears to be strongly affected by the density of nodes
      (and the resulting number of known distance pairs), what minimum density is necessary to
      allow localization in the worst case?
  •   How are these results affected by more natural assumptions about communications ranges,
      allowing different maximum distances between adjacent nodes or the possibility of placing
      small numbers of high-range beacons?
  •   How does the dimension (e.g., in the plane or in 3-space) affect the problem?
  Answers to any of these questions would be an important step toward producing practical
localization algorithms.
  One potential direction to resolve the computational complexity issue is to introduce other
modalities. In particular, other work such as [47] approaches network localization with angles,
bearings and headings in addition to some distance constraints. Drawing on more general work on
geometric constraints such as angles and directions in CAD such as in [55], we have further generic
global uniqueness results that can give new insights where certain patterns of angles or headings
are used [21], as well as insights into the complexity of general patterns of angle constraints. This
will be explored further in a future paper.


                                         ACKNOWLEDGMENT
  We thank Joseph T. Chang, Stanley C. Eisenstat, and Jie (Archer) Lin for valuable suggestions.
We thank Theodore Jewell for valuable comments on an early draft. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions which improved the paper.


                                                   32
                                                       R EFERENCES
 [1] J. Albowicz, A. Chen, and L. Zhang. Recursive position estimation in sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 9th International
     Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) ’01, pages 35–41, Riverside, CA, Nov. 2001.
 [2] A. Y. Alfakih, A. Khandani, and H. Wolkowicz. Solving Euclidean distance matrix completion problems via semidefinite
     programming. Computat. Optim. Appl., 12(1-3):13–30, 1999.
 [3] B. Anderson, P. Belhumeur, T. Eren, D. Goldenberg, A. Morse, W. Whiteley, and R. Wang. Global properties of easily
     localizable sensor networks. Preprint Australian National University, 2005.
 [4] M. Appel and R. Russo. The maximum vertex degree of a graph on uniform points in [0, 1]2 . Adv. Applied Probability,
     29:567–581, 1997.
 [5] J. Aspnes, D. Goldenberg, and Y. R. Yang. On the computational complexity of sensor network localization. In Proceedings
     of First International Workshop on Algorithmic Aspects of Wireless Sensor Networks, Turku, Finland, July 2004.
 [6] A. Berg and T. Jordan. A proof of Connelly’s conjecture on 3-connected generic cycles. J. Comb. Theory B., 2002.
 [7] P. Biswas and Y. Ye. Semidefinite programming for ad hoc wireless sensor network localization. In F. Zhao and L. Guibas,
     editors, Proceedings of Third International Workshop on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN’04), Berkeley, CA,
     Apr. 2004.
 [8] B. Bollobás. Random Graph Theory. Academic Press, London, 1985.
 [9] H. Breu and D. G. Kirkpatrick. Unit disk graph recognition is NP-hard. Computational Geometry, 9(1-2):3–24, 1998.
[10] N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin. GPS-less low-cost outdoor localization for very small devices. IEEE Personal
     Communications Magazine, 7(5):28–34, Oct. 2000.
[11] S. Capkun, M. Hamdi, and J.-P. Hubaux. GPS-free positioning in mobile ad-hoc networks. In HICSS, 2001.
[12] K. Chintalapudi, R. Govindan, G. Sukhatme, and A. Dhariwal. Ad-hoc localization using ranging and sectoring. In Proceedings
     of IEEE INFOCOM ’04, Hong Kong, China, Apr. 2004.
[13] R. Connelly. Generic global rigidity. Available at http://www.math.cornell.edu/˜connelly/, Oct. 2003.
[14] R. Connelly. Generic global rigidity. Discrete Comp. Geometry, 33, 2005.
[15] G. Crippen and T. Havel. Distance Geometry and Molecular Conformation. John Wiley & Sons, 1988.
[16] J. Dı́az, J. Petit, and M. Serna. A random graph model for optical networks of sensors. Technical Report LSI-02-72-R,
     Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Inform‘atics, Universitat Polit‘ecnica de Catalunya, December 2002.
[17] J. Dı́az, J. Petit, and M. Serna. Random scaled sector graphs. Technical Report LSI-02-47-R, Departament de Llenguatges i
     Sistemes Inform‘atics, Universitat Polit‘ecnica de Catalunya, June 2002.
[18] L. Doherty, K. S. J. Pister, and L. E. Ghaoui. Convex position estimation in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of
     IEEE INFOCOM ’01, pages 1655–1633, Anchorage, AK, Apr. 2001.
[19] T. Eren, P. Belhumeur, B. Anderson, and A. Morse. A framework for maintaining formations based on rigidity. In Proceedings
     of the 15th IFAC World Congress, Barcelona, Spain, July 2002.
[20] T. Eren, D. Goldenberg, W. Whitley, Y. R. Yang, A. S. Morse, B. D. O. Anderson, and P. N. Belhumeur. Rigidity, computation,
     and randomization in network localization. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’04, Hong Kong, China, Apr. 2004.
[21] T. Eren, W. Whiteley, A. Morse, and P. Belhumeur. Sensor network topologies of formations with distance - direction - angle
     constraints. In Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Maui, HI, USA, Mar. 2003.
[22] A. Farago. Scalable analysis and design of ad hoc networks via random graph theory. In Proceedings of the 6th international
     workshop on Discrete algorithms and methods for mobile computing and communications, pages 43–50. ACM Press, 2002.
[23] G. H. Forman and J. Zahorjan. The challenges of mobile computing. IEEE Computer, 27(4):38–47, Apr. 1994.
[24] M. Garey and D. Johnson. Computers and Intractability. W.H. Freeman and Co., New York, NY, 1979.
                                                               33
[25] J. Gill. Computational complexity of probabilistic Turing machines. SIAM Journal on Computing, 6(4):675–695, 1977.
[26] D. Goldenberg, A. Krishnamurthy, W. Maness, Y. R. Yang, A. Young, A. S. Morse, A. Savvides, and B. Anderson. Network
     localization in partially localizable networks. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’05, Miami, FL, Apr. 2005.
[27] J. Graver, B. Servatius, and H. Servatius. Combinatorial Rigidity, volume 2 of AMS Monographs. American Math. Society,
     Providence, 1993.
[28] T. He, C. Huang, B. Blum, J. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher. Range-free localization schemes in large scale sensor networks.
     In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (Mobicom), pages 81–95, San
     Diego, CA, Sept. 2003.
[29] B. Hendrickson. Conditions for unique graph realizations. SIAM J. Comput., 21(1):65–84, 1992.
[30] B. Hendrickson. The molecule problem: Exploiting structure in global optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 5(4):835–
     857, 1995.
[31] L. Henneberg. Die Graphische Statik der starren Systeme. Johnson Reprint, 1911.
[32] B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins. Global Positioning System: Theory and Practice, Fourth Edition.
     Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[33] J. E. Hopcroft and R. Tarjan. Dividing a graph into triconnected components. SIAM J. Comput., 3:135–158, 1973.
[34] B. Jackson and T. Jordàn. Connected rigidity matroids and unique realizations of graphs. J. Combinatorial Theory B, 94:1–29,
     2005.
[35] B. Jackson, T. Jordán, and Z. Szabadka. Globally linked pairs of vertices in equivalent realizations of graphs. Technical Report
     TR-2005-07, Egerv’ary Research Group, Budapest, 2005.
[36] D. Jacobs and B. Hendrickson. An algorithm for two dimensional rigidity percolation: The pebble game. J. Computational
     Physics, 137(2):346–365, 1997.
[37] X. Ji. Sensor positioning in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks with multidimensional scaling. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM
     ’04, Hong Kong, China, Apr. 2004.
[38] B. Karp and H. T. Kung. GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless routing for wireless networks. In Proceedings of the Sixth
     International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (Mobicom), Boston, MA, Aug. 2000.
[39] B. Krishnamachari, S. B. Wicker, and R. Bejar. Phase transition phenomena in wireless ad-hoc networks. In Proceedings of
     Symposium on Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks, GlobeCom 2001, Antonio, Texas, 2001.
[40] G. Laman. On graphs and rigidity of plane skeletal structures. Journal of Engineering Mathematics, 4:331–340, 2002.
[41] X.-Y. Li, P.-J. Wan, Y. Wang, and C.-W. Yi. Fault tolerant deployment and topology control in wireless networks. In
     Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc), Annapolis, MD, June
     2003.
[42] H. Lim and J. Hou. Localizatio for anisotropic sensor networks. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’05, Miami, FL, Apr.
     2005.
[43] G. L. Miller and V. Ramachandran. A new graph triconnectivity algorithm and its parallelization. Combinatorica, 12:53–76,
     1992.
[44] D. Moore, J. Leonard, D. Rus, and S. Teller. Robust distributed network localization with noisy range measurements. In
     Proceedings of The Second ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys), Baltimore, Maryland, Nov.
     2004.
[45] J. More and Z. Wu. Global continuation for distance geometry problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 7:814–836, 1997.
[46] D. Niculescu and B. Nath. Ad-hoc positioning system. In Proceedings of IEEE Globecom 2001, Nov. 2001.



                                                                 34
[47] D. Niculescu and B. Nath. Ad hoc positioning system (APS) using AOA. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’03, San
     Francisco, CA, Apr. 2003.
[48] M. D. Penrose. On k-connectivity for a geometric random graph. Random Structures and Algorithms, 15(2):145–164, 1999.
[49] N. Priyantha, H. Balakrishnan, E. Demaine, and S. Teller. Mobile-assisted localization in wireless sensor networks. In
     Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’05, Miami, FL, Apr. 2005.
[50] N. B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan. The Cricket location-support system. In Proceedings of the Sixth
     International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (Mobicom), pages 32–43, Boston, MA, Aug. 2000.
[51] B. Roth. Rigid and flexible frameworks. American Mathematical Monthly, 88:6–21, 1981.
[52] C. Savarese, J. Rabay, and K. Langendoen. Robust positioning algorithms for distributed ad-hoc wireless sensor networks. In
     USENIX Technical Annual Conference, Monterey, CA, June 2002.
[53] A. Savvides, C.-C. Han, and M. B. Strivastava. Dynamic fine-grained localization in ad-hoc networks of sensors. In Proceedings
     of the Seventh International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (Mobicom), pages 166–179, Rome, Italy, July
     2001.
[54] J. Saxe. Embeddability of weighted graphs in k-space is strongly NP-hard. In Proceedings of the 17th Allerton Conference
     in Communications, Control and Computing, pages 480–489, 1979.
[55] B. Servatius and W. Whiteley. Constraining plane configurations in cad: combinatorics of lengths and directions. SIAM Journal
     on Discrete Mathematics, 12:136–153, 1999.
[56] Y. Shang and W. Ruml. Improved MDS-based localization. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’04, Hong Kong, China, Apr.
     2004.
[57] R. Stoleru, T. He, J. Stankovic, and D. Luebke. High-accuracy, low-cost localization system for wireless sensor network. In
     Proceedings of The Third ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys), Nov. 2005.
[58] L. G. Valiant and V. V. Vazirani. NP is as easy as detecting unique solutions. Theoretical Computer Science, 47(1):85–93,
     1986.
[59] M. Weiser. Some computer science problems in ubiquitous computing. Communications of ACM, July 1993.
[60] W. Whiteley. Some matroids from discrete applied geometry. In J. E. Bonin, J. G. Oxley, and B. Servatius, editors,
     Contemporary Mathematics, volume 197. American Mathematical Society, 1996.
[61] W. Whiteley. Rigidity and scene analysis. In J. Goodman and J. O’Rourke, editors, Handbook of Discrete and Computational
     Geometry, pages 1327–1354. CRC Press, 2004.




                                                               35
