Article

NLOS Identification- and Correction-Focused Fusion of UWB
and LiDAR-SLAM Based on Factor Graph Optimization for
High-Precision Positioning with Reduced Drift
Zhijian Chen, Aigong Xu *, Xin Sui, Yuting Hao, Cong Zhang and Zhengxu Shi

                                             School of Geomatics, Liaoning Technical University, Fuxin 123000, China
                                             * Correspondence: xuaigong@lntu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-137-9509-2995


                                             Abstract: In this study, we propose a tightly coupled integrated method of ultrawideband (UWB)
                                             and light detection and ranging (LiDAR)-based simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) for
                                             global navigation satellite system (GNSS)-denied environments to achieve high-precision
                                             positioning with reduced drift. Specifically, we focus on non-line-of-sight (NLOS) identification and
                                             correction. In previous work, we utilized laser point cloud maps to identify and exclude NLOS
                                             measurements in real time to attenuate their severe effects on the integrated system. However, the
                                             complete exclusion of NLOS measurements will likely lead to deterioration in the dilution of
                                             precision (DOP) for the remaining line-of-sight (LOS) anchors, counterproductively introducing
                                             large positioning errors into the integrated system. Therefore, this study considers the ranging
                                             accuracy and geometric distribution of UWB anchors and innovatively proposes an NLOS
Citation: Chen, Z.; Xu, A.; Sui, X.;
Hao, Y.; Zhang, C.; Shi, Z. NLOS
                                             correction method using a grey prediction model. For a poor line-of-sight (LOS) anchor geometric
Identification- and                          distribution, the grey prediction model is used to fill in the gaps by predicting the NLOS
Correction-Focused Fusion of UWB             measurements based on historical measurements. Including the corrected measurements effectively
and LiDAR-SLAM Based on Factor               improves the original poor geometric configuration, improving the system positioning accuracy.
Graph Optimization for                       Since conventional filtering-based fusion methods are exceedingly sensitive to measurement
High-Precision Positioning with              outliers, we use state-of-the-art factor graph optimization (FGO) to tightly integrate the UWB
Reduced Drift. Remote Sens. 2022, 14,        measurements (LOS and corrected measurements) with LiDAR-SLAM. The temporal correlation
4258. https://doi.org/10.3390/               between measurements and the redundant system measurements effectively enhance the
rs14174258
                                             robustness of the integrated system. Experimental results show that the tightly coupled integrated
Academic Editor: Joaquín Martínez-           method combining NLOS correction and FGO improves the positioning accuracy under a poor
Sánchez                                      geometric distribution, increases the system availability, and achieves better positioning than
                                             filtering-based fusion methods with a root-mean-square error of 0.086 m in the plane direction,
Received: 22 July 2022
Accepted: 24 August 2022
                                             achieving subdecimeter indoor high-precision positioning.
Published: 29 August 2022
                                             Keywords: integrated positioning; UWB; LiDAR-SLAM; NLOS correction; grey prediction model;
Publisher’s     Note:      MDPI      stays
                                             tightly coupled; FGO
neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims    in   published      maps    and
institutional affiliations.

                                             1. Introduction
                                                  Reliable and stable positioning and navigation technology is a necessary foundation
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.            and important guarantee for mobile robotics. With the booming development of robotics,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.           highly intelligent robots have assisted or replaced humans in some of their work (e.g.,
This article is an open access article       warehouse logistics robots or inspection robots), and mobile robot work scenarios are
distributed under the terms and              undergoing increasingly challenging transformations from known to unknown, from
conditions of the Creative Commons           simple to complex, from static to dynamic, and from short-term to long-term positioning
Attribution      (CC     BY)      license    [1]. To precisely locate robots in global navigation satellite system (GNSS)-denied
(https://creativecommons.org/license
                                             scenarios, where system reliability is critical, simultaneous localization and mapping
s/by/4.0/).
                                             based on light detection and ranging (LiDAR-SLAM) technology is more widely used




Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14174258                                                   www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                         2 of 22




                              than other positioning and sensing methods due to its long detection range, high accuracy,
                              and high robustness to light and weather [2,3].
                                    As an active sensing method, LiDAR-SLAM obtains a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF)
                              pose by matching scanned environmental features with a feature map while updating the
                              map for self-motion estimation. Laser point cloud-based pose estimation algorithms can
                              be divided into two categories [4,5], namely, matching-based [6–9] and feature-based [10–
                              12] algorithms. Iterative closest point (ICP)-based and normal distributions transform
                              (NDT)-based algorithms are the best-known matching-based methods. They provide
                              relative pose estimation by directly using a large volume of streaming raw scans in the
                              form of unorganized point clouds from the light detection and ranging (LiDAR) output,
                              therefore making them more costly in time and less computationally efficient. Feature-
                              based methods have attracted extensive attention to improve the performance of LiDAR-
                              SLAM with limited computational resources. As the most well-known feature-based
                              method, LiDAR odometry and mapping (LOAM) distinguishes between geometric
                              primitives (e.g., line segments and planes) by evaluating the smoothness of local regions
                              to associate consistency among successive frames with the global map [13]. Lightweight
                              and ground-optimized LOAM (LeGO-LOAM) adds segmentation processing to refine
                              different features based on LOAM, which effectively improves the quality of feature
                              extraction while reducing the number of geometric primitives, further enhancing the
                              accuracy and stability of LOAM positioning. These feature-based methods have relatively
                              low power consumption and allow for real-time applications. However, as a recursive
                              navigation technology, its positioning errors accumulate as the distance traveled increases
                              [14]. In long-distance positioning using only LiDAR-SLAM, such recursion errors cannot
                              be ignored, and a closed-loop correction method is usually adopted to reduce its effects
                              [15]. However, real-time closed-loop detection is frequently computationally expensive
                              and susceptible to outliers, and the closed-loop conditions are difficult to satisfy in some
                              unknown and large-scale scenarios. Therefore, absolute positioning becomes an
                              indispensable auxiliary solution to reduce the dependence of LiDAR-SLAM on a closed-
                              loop correction.
                                    Common absolute positioning methods can be divided into two categories, namely,
                              active beacons (e.g., Wi-Fi [16], Bluetooth [17], active radio-frequency identification
                              (RFID) [18], and ultrawideband (UWB)) and passive beacons (e.g., passive RFID [19] and
                              near field communication (NFC) [20]). Among them, UWB, with its superior spatial
                              resolution, immunity to multipath errors, and strong signal penetration, makes it widely
                              used for high-precision positioning in GNSS-denied environments. However, realistic
                              scenarios are frequently dynamic and complex. Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) environments
                              such as fixed interior walls and moving objects (e.g., moving vehicles and pedestrians)
                              can interfere with or even interrupt the direct transmission of UWB signals to some extent,
                              resulting in excessive path delay in distance measurements. This positive bias is known
                              as NLOS error [21,22], which is the main error source for UWB ranging and positioning
                              errors. To improve spatial positioning accuracy, effectively and precisely addressing
                              NLOS errors has become a hot issue in the field of UWB positioning. At present, methods
                              to improve UWB positioning performance under NLOS conditions can be divided into
                              two categories: NLOS identification and NLOS mitigation [23,24]. NLOS identification is
                              mainly performed using distance estimation-based methods [25], channel statistics-based
                              methods [26], and position estimation-based methods [27] to distinguish between line-of-
                              sight (LOS) and NLOS conditions. After NLOS identification, the differentiated UWB
                              measurements need to be applied to NLOS mitigation for corresponding processing to
                              reduce the negative impact of NLOS errors on position estimation and obtain higher
                              positioning accuracy. There are typically two strategies. The first is to correct the ranging
                              values, that is, estimate the ranging errors and subtract them from the raw measurements,
                              and then use the corrected ranging values for positioning [28–31]. However, carefully
                              isolating and studying each parameter affecting the ranging errors is very challenging and
                              error-prone [32]. The second strategy is to use different residual formulas to adjust the
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                       3 of 22




                              weight of the NLOS measurements in the positioning module to achieve robustness to
                              NLOS errors [33], but its positioning performance may vary in different scenarios.
                                    Currently, the fusion of UWB and LiDAR-SLAM measurements at the system level
                              falls into two main categories: filtering-based [27] and graph optimization-based [34,35]
                              methods. Zhou et al. [34] estimated the sensor state by minimizing the sum of the
                              Mahalanobis norms of the UWB and LiDAR measurement residuals while automatically
                              adjusting the weights of the measurement residuals in the state estimation in accordance
                              with the degradation degree of sensor measurements as a way to mitigate the effect of
                              degradation. Liu et al. [35] proposed utilizing a two-step graph optimization framework
                              to fuse odometry, UWB, and LiDAR information for positioning and mapping in
                              unknown and featureless environments. Even though both abovementioned schemes can
                              achieve better positioning results in a favorable environment, the effect of UWB NLOS
                              errors on the integrated system is not sufficiently considered. In our previous work [27],
                              we innovatively proposed an NLOS identification method with less environmental
                              dependence and prior information. By combining a laser point cloud map generated by
                              LiDAR-SLAM and the position information of UWB anchors, the LOS and NLOS
                              receptions were distinguished in real-time. Subsequently, using the identified UWB LOS
                              measurements and LiDAR-SLAM solution results, a UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled
                              positioning system based on a robust extended Kalman filter (REKF) was constructed.
                              Nevertheless, we found that the positioning accuracy of the integrated system is affected
                              not only by the UWB ranging accuracy but also by the geometric distribution of the UWB
                              anchors. Completely excluding NLOS measurements from the positioning is most likely
                              to result in a poorer dilution of precision (DOP), which in turn introduces a large
                              positioning error into the positioning system, which is seriously inconsistent with our
                              expectations. Meanwhile, as a scheme for multisensor data fusion, an extended Kalman
                              filter (EKF) cannot provide high robustness because it only considers the estimated value
                              of the last epoch and the measured value of the current epoch, ignoring a large amount of
                              historical measurement information. Therefore, based on this work, we further propose a
                              factor graph optimization (FGO)-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled integrated
                              system with NLOS identification and correction using a grey prediction model. The main
                              contributions of this study are as follows.
                              •   To prevent the effect of a poor geometric distribution on the integrated system and
                                  to improve the utilization of UWB measurements, we propose and implement an
                                  NLOS correction method using a grey prediction model. First, LOS and NLOS
                                  anchors are distinguished in real-time by the NLOS identification algorithm using a
                                  laser point cloud. Then, the DOP value of the remaining LOS anchors after excluding
                                  the NLOS anchors is calculated. If the DOP value is higher than a threshold, the
                                  exclusion of the NLOS anchors is considered to have a great effect on the geometric
                                  distribution of the UWB anchors and discarding these NLOS measurements will
                                  result in compromised accuracy. At this point, we use the grey prediction model to
                                  predict the NLOS measurements based on historical measurements to fill in the gaps
                                  of UWB measurements and subsequently use the LOS and corrected measurements
                                  as the inputs to the integrated system to maintain a highly accurate and robust
                                  navigation state. Conversely, if the DOP value is less than the threshold, the LOS
                                  measurements are directly used as the inputs to the integrated system. Experimental
                                  results show that the NLOS correction method using the grey prediction model is
                                  reasonable and effective, and it significantly improves the positioning accuracy of the
                                  system under a poor geometric distribution.
                              •   To make full use of historical measurement information to provide more accurate
                                  and robust positioning results, we adopt an FGO-based fusion method instead of a
                                  conventional filtering-based fusion method during the UWB and LiDAR data fusion
                                  phase. In contrast to the filtering-based method, the FGO-based fusion method
                                  connects all historical measurements via LiDAR-SLAM factors and further
                                  establishes a global cost function to jointly optimize all historical and current
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                         4 of 22




                                   information. The temporal correlation between measurements and the redundant
                                   measurements of the system enhance the robustness of the integrated system to
                                   outliers, multiple iterations effectively help the system approach the optimal state
                                   estimation, and the introduction of a sliding window significantly reduces the scale
                                   of the solution and solves the problem of real-time solution of the factor graph. A
                                   dynamic positioning experiment demonstrates the superiority and accuracy of the
                                   FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated system.
                                  The rest of this work is structured as follows. Section 2.1 provides an overview of the
                              overall system framework and details of the key components. Section 2.2 describes the
                              coordinate systems involved in the integrated system and carefully designs the external
                              parameter calibration scheme for the two types of sensors. The details of the proposed
                              UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled integrated method combining NLOS correction and
                              FGO are described in Sections 2.3–2.6. Section 3 provides the experimental setup while
                              reporting and analyzing the results of the system performance tests. Finally, the work is
                              summarized, and future work is discussed in Section 4.

                              2. Methodology
                              2.1. Software Framework
                                   The framework of the proposed FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled
                              integrated system with NLOS identification and correction using a grey prediction model
                              is shown in Figure 1. First, the temporal and spatial datums of both the UWB and LiDAR
                              sensors are unified by the robot operating system (ROS) and the calibrated external
                              parameter matrix (purple blocks in Figure 1). Second, the NLOS identification algorithm
                              using the laser point cloud in our previous work is adopted to distinguish the LOS
                              measurements from NLOS measurements in real-time (green blocks in Figure 1). Then,
                              the DOP value of the remaining LOS anchors is calculated and compared with a threshold.
                              Suppose this DOP value is higher than the threshold. In that case, the geometric
                              distribution of the remaining LOS anchors is considered poor, the NLOS measurements
                              need to be predicted using the grey prediction model, and the LOS and corrected
                              measurements are used as the inputs to the integrated system (yellow blocks in Figure 1).
                              Alternatively, only the LOS measurements are used for integrated navigation (blue blocks
                              in Figure 1), effectively controlling the geometric distribution on the effect of positioning
                              accuracy. Finally, considering that UWB measurements are also affected by signal
                              multipath effects, intensity fading, and other factors, an FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM
                              integrated system is designed, effectively enhancing the robustness of the integrated
                              system to outliers by using the strong correlation of historical measurements within a
                              sliding window in the time dimension while reducing the possibility of LiDAR-SLAM
                              divergence (orange blocks in Figure 1). The red dashed block in Figure 1 represents the
                              contribution of this work.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                      5 of 22




                              Figure 1. Framework of the proposed UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated system with NLOS
                              identification and correction using a grey prediction model.

                              2.2. Coordinate Frame
                                   A reference datum (coordinate system) is a crucial concept in the study of navigation
                              systems. Sensor measurements, such as position, velocity, and attitude, are based on a
                              description of a reference frame, and the description varies in different frames. The
                              proposed integrated system has two different types of sensors, UWB and LiDAR. It is
                              essential to unify the sensor measurements based on a common coordinate system and
                              establish a functional relationship between the sensor measurements and navigation state
                              information to fuse the measurements of these two types of sensors (as shown in Figure
                              2).




                              Figure 2. Coordinate systems.

                              •    w-frame: the UWB coordinate system, with the indoor control point as the origin, x-
                                   axis pointing right, y-axis pointing forward, and z-axis forming a right-handed
                                   cartesian coordinate system with x-axis and y-axis.
                              •    l-frame: the LiDAR coordinate system, moving with the vehicle [15], with the LiDAR
                                   measurement center as the origin, x-axis pointing forward, y-axis pointing left, and
                                   z-axis forming a right-handed cartesian coordinate system with x-axis and y-axis.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                 6 of 22




                              •    g-frame: the LiDAR-SLAM coordinate system, with the initial LiDAR-SLAM position
                                   as the origin, whose axes coincide exactly with the l-frame at the initial LiDAR-SLAM
                                   time.
                                   Considering the computational efficiency of the subsequent NLOS identification
                              algorithm using the laser point cloud, the g-frame is used as the fusion coordinate system
                                                                                               g
                              in this study. Therefore, the transformation matrix Tw from the w-frame to the g-frame
                              needs to be accurately obtained to unify the measurements. As shown in Figure 2, the
                              LiDAR sensor can provide precise point cloud data of the surrounding environment in
                              the g-frame, and the total station can also accurately observe the edges (lines or points) of
                              buildings in the w-frame. Accordingly, based on the common-view method, this study
                              takes the building edge points as the calibration objects and obtains the UWB anchor
                                                       (
                              coordinates xanchor = xanchor , yanchor , zanchor   ) in the g-frame and the lever-arm vector l     l


                              with the laser center pointing to the UWB mobile tag center in the l-frame by solving the
                                                               g
                              transformation matrix Tw through the observed multiple corresponding feature point
                              pairs    p , p  .
                                          w   g




                              2.3. UWB NLOS Identification Using a Laser Point Cloud Map
                                   As an active sensor, LiDAR can take long-range, high-precision three-dimensional
                              (3-D) measurements of the surrounding environment. LiDAR visually represents objects
                              in the environment in the form of accurate, dense 3-D point clouds while using SLAM 6-
                              DoF pose estimation to register raw laser point clouds into the SLAM coordinate system
                              to obtain a globally consistent map.
                                   Consequently, when positioning is performed in GNSS-denied scenarios, obstacles
                              (fixed interior walls or moving objects) in the NLOS region that are prone to UWB ranging
                              errors are known in the laser point cloud map in terms of their location and size, which is
                              reflected as many point-cloud clusters of varying sizes. Based on this NLOS assumption,
                              the UWB LOS and NLOS measurements can be effectively distinguished by combining
                              the UWB anchor coordinates in the SLAM coordinate system. The NLOS identification
                              algorithm using the laser point cloud consists of three modules: identification
                              preprocessing, point cloud search, and collision detection.
                              •    Identification preprocessing module: LiDAR-SLAM is used to deduce the UWB
                                                                       (
                                   mobile tag coordinate x tag = xtag , y tag , z tag   ) in accordance with the lever-arm vector
                                      l and the UWB anchor set ua = ua1 , ua2 ,
                                      l                                    all
                                                                                             , uan  iterated through to obtain the
                                   coordinates of the UWB anchor to be identified for determining the NLOS
                                   identification search direction. According to the distance, vertical azimuth, and
                                   horizontal azimuth between the mobile tag and anchor, the search center points, and
                                   search times are calculated in steps of 1 m.
                              •    Point cloud search module: The global map is converted into a k-dimensional tree
                                   (KD-tree) structure, and point clouds are searched for in the neighborhood with a
                                   radius of 1 m. When the number of point clouds exceeds the set threshold, there may
                                   be obstacle occlusion in the line-of-sight direction (i.e., the search direction for NLOS
                                   identification); that is, the anchor may be an NLOS anchor.
                              •    Collision detection module: To avoid misjudgment and improve the accuracy of
                                   NLOS identification, whether the line-of-sight direction intersects with the searched
                                   neighboring point cloud cluster is evaluated to distinguish between true and false
                                   obstacles and further obtain the LOS anchor set ualos = ua1 , ua2 ,          , uas  and NLOS
                                   anchor set ua       nlos
                                                              = ua1 , ua2 , , uar  . More details of the NLOS identification
                                   algorithm using the laser point cloud can be found in [27].
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                    7 of 22




                              2.4. Calculation of the HDOP Value for the UWB LOS Anchor
                                   To achieve satisfactory positioning performance of the UWB/LiDAR-SLAM
                              integrated system, in our previous work, the UWB LOS measurements filtered by NLOS
                              identification and the LiDAR-SLAM 6-DoF pose estimation were used as the
                              measurement inputs to the integrated system in a tightly coupled form. Unfortunately,
                              we found that the positioning accuracy of the integrated system is affected not only by the
                              accuracy of the UWB measurements but also by the geometric distribution of the UWB
                              anchors. Using only the LOS measurements can counterproductively introduce a large
                              positioning error to the integrated system when the geometric distribution of the
                              remaining LOS anchors is poor.
                                   Consequently, this study draws on the concept of the DOP value in a GNSS to
                              analyze the goodness of the geometric distribution of the remaining LOS anchors when
                              all NLOS anchors are excluded. The DOP value includes the following parameters: the
                              geometric dilution of precision (GDOP), position dilution of precision (PDOP), horizontal
                              dilution of precision (HDOP), vertical dilution of precision (VDOP), and time dilution of
                              precision (TDOP) [36]. Since the ground in GNSS-denied environments is mostly flat, this
                              study focuses on the positioning of the integrated system in a two-dimensional (2-D)
                              plane. Figure 3 shows the effect of different geometric distributions on the 2-D positioning
                              errors. The thicker solid line represents the true ranging value, and the two nearby dashed
                              lines indicate the possible ranging errors. The intersection of the thick solid lines is the
                              true position of the mobile tag. The purple part represents the possible positioning area
                              of the system due to the presence of ranging errors. With the same ranging errors, a
                              smaller HDOP value represents a more uniform geometric distribution of the anchors
                              (Figure 3a), better positioning performance, and smaller positioning errors. Conversely, a
                              larger HDOP value represents a poorer geometric distribution of the anchors (Figure 3b),
                              which significantly expands the possible positioning area and increases the positioning
                              error.




                                                          (a)                                           (b)
                              Figure 3. Geometric distributions of the UWB anchors: (a) good geometric distribution and (b) poor
                              geometric distribution.

                                   The true distance ri between the UWB mobile tag ( x, y ) and the i-th LOS anchor

                              (xanchor
                                i
                                         , yianchor   ) can be expressed as follows:
                                                                        (x − x        ) + (y − y            ) , i = 1,2, , s
                                                                                      2                     2
                                                                 ri =        anchor
                                                                             i
                                                                                                   anchor
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                   (1)

                                   Using a Taylor series expansion of the observation equation at the approximate
                              position of the mobile tag ( x0 , y0 ) and neglecting components above the second order,
                              we can obtain:
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                              8 of 22




                                                                              r1       r1 
                                                               r1 − r0 ,1   x        y 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             x − x0 
                                                                          =                                                            (2)
                                                               rs − r0 ,s   rs            y − y0 
                                                                                      rs  
                                                                              x        y 
                                                                             
                              where

                                                              ri                   xi − x0
                                                               =
                                                               x      (x − x ) + (y − y )
                                                                                         2              2
                                                                            i        0         i    0
                                                                                                                                            (3)
                                                                ri =               yi − y0
                                                                y
                                                                         (x − x ) + (y − y )
                                                                                         2              2
                                                                          i        0         i    0


                              where ei = 
                                          ri x, ri y denotes the directional cosine from an unknown point to a
                                                                                                                       T
                              known point in both the x and y directions, and J = e1T ,                   , esT        denotes the Jacobian
                              matrix of the distance equation.
                                  The error covariance matrix Q and the HDOP value can be obtained as follows:

                                                                            q11 q12 
                                                                     ( )
                                                                       −1
                                                              Q = J J = 
                                                                     T
                                                                                      
                                                                            q21 q22                                                       (4)
                                                               
                                                               HDOP = tr (Q ) = q11 + q22

                              where q ij denotes the covariance of the i-th measurement with the j-th measurement. The
                              HDOP value is only related to the relative position of the mobile tag and the LOS anchors,
                              independent of the selected coordinates. This positional relationship is the geometric
                              distribution of the UWB system.

                              2.5. UWB NLOS Correction Using the Grey Prediction Model
                                   If the HDOP value of the remaining LOS anchors fluctuates less and is lower than a
                              threshold, subsequently, when fusing the data with LiDAR-SLAM, all NLOS
                              measurements can be excluded, and only the filtered LOS measurements will be used as
                              the measurement input. Otherwise, considering that the NLOS anchors have a great effect
                              on the geometric distribution of the UWB anchors, excluding the NLOS anchors will lead
                              to a poorer geometric distribution, which will impact the positioning accuracy.
                                   This study proposes an NLOS correction method using a grey prediction model to
                              improve the reliability of the positioning system [37]. When the HDOP value of the
                              remaining LOS anchors is higher than a threshold, all existing NLOS measurements are
                              discarded, and the NLOS measurements are instead predicted using a grey prediction
                              model based on a small number of historical measurements to obtain the corrected
                              measurements, which are used together with the LOS measurements as the inputs to the
                              integrated system. The inclusion of the corrected measurements better improves the
                              geometric configuration of the original LOS anchors and minimizes the HDOP value of
                              the positioning system, thereby effectively improving the positioning accuracy and
                              robustness of the system. The NLOS correction method process using the grey prediction
                              model is as follows.
                              1.   The UWB measurements are organized into the following matrix form:
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                              9 of 22




                                                                                r1,1
                                                                                    (0)          (0)
                                                                                               r1,2          r1,(0)m 
                                                                                 (0)            (0)                 
                                                                                  r            r2,2          r2,(0)m 
                                                                         R(0) =  2,1                                        (5)
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                 (0)                                
                                                                                rn ,1        rn(0)
                                                                                                  ,2
                                                                                                              (0)
                                                                                                             rn ,m 

                              where R(0) denotes the nonnegative original time series; the subscripts n and m denote
                                                                                                (0)
                              the number of UWB anchors and measurements, respectively; ri ,u denotes the u-th
                              historical measurement of the i-th UWB anchor; and this study uses m = 6 .
                              2.    A first-order accumulated generation operation on the original data is performed to
                                    obtain a new data sequence with an approximate exponential law, aiming to reduce
                                    the impact of randomness and volatility on the data:

                                                                                r1,1
                                                                                    (1)          (1)
                                                                                               r1,2          r1,(1)m 
                                                                                 (1)            (1)                 
                                                                                  r            r2,2          r2,(1)m 
                                                                         R(1) =  2,1                                        (6)
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                 (1)                                
                                                                                rn ,1        rn(1),2        (1)
                                                                                                             rn ,m 

                                                u
                              where ri(1)
                                      ,u
                                          =  ri(0)
                                                ,v
                                                    .
                                               v =1

                              3.    The consecutive neighborhood sequence C(1) of sequence R(1) is as follows:

                                                                                  c1,2
                                                                                     (1)        (1)
                                                                                               c1,3          c1,(1)m 
                                                                                  (1)          (1)                  
                                                                                   c           c2,3          c(1)
                                                                         C (1) =  2,2                        2,m 
                                                                                                                             (7)
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                  (1)                               
                                                                                 cn ,2       cn(1),3        (1)
                                                                                                             cn ,m 

                              where ci(1)
                                       ,v
                                          =  ri(1)
                                                ,v
                                                    + (1 −  ) ri(1)
                                                                 ,v−1
                                                                      , and  = 0.5 .
                              4.    The grey differential equation of the GM(1,1) model is established according to the
                                    approximate exponential law:

                                                                                   ri(0)
                                                                                     ,v
                                                                                         +  ci(1),v =                      (8)

                              where c i ,v denotes the background value of the grey differential equation and  and
                                         (1)


                               denote the development coefficient and the grey action quantity, respectively, which
                              can be solved for using the least squares (LS) method:

                                                                                
                                                                                           (             )
                                                                                       −1
                                                                                = B B B Y
                                                                                     T    T
                                                                                                                             (9)
                                                                                
                                                                                
                              where

                                                                              ri(0)       −ci(1)             1
                                                                               (0)        (1)                 
                                                                                   ,2             ,2

                                                                                r             − c               1
                                                                          Y =  i ,3  B =  i ,3                          (10)
                                                                                                              
                                                                               (0)        (1)                 
                                                                              ri ,m     −ci ,m            1

                              where Y denotes the historical measurement vector, and B denotes the sequence matrix.
                              5.    The whitening function for the differential equation is constructed using the solution
                                    to the above equation:
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                               10 of 22




                                                                           dr (1)
                                                                                  +  r (1) =                               (11)
                                                                            dt
                                   Thereby, the time response sequence of the grey differential equation is obtained as:

                                                                           −  v−1 
                                                         ri(1) =  ri(0) −  e ( ) + , v = 2,3,        ,m + 1                (12)
                                                           ,v
                                                                 
                                                                     ,1
                                                                                    

                              6.   Finally, the inverse transformation operation of Equation (12) is performed to obtain
                                   the prediction function of the original sequence of the i-th UWB anchor as follows:

                                                                                            −  v−1
                                                ri(0)
                                                  ,v
                                                      = ri(1)
                                                          ,v
                                                              − ri(1)(
                                                                  ,v −1      )
                                                                        = 1 − e   ri(0)
                                                                                  
                                                                                      ,1
                                                                                          −  e ( ) , v = 2,3,
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                 ,m + 1      (13)

                                   The GM(1,1) model established by the UWB historical measurements (epoch 1 to
                              epoch m) can be used to predict the NLOS measurement (epoch m + 1) when the HDOP
                              value of the remaining LOS anchors is higher than the threshold. Meanwhile, after
                              obtaining the corrected measurement (epoch m + 1), the initial measurement of the original
                              sequence is discarded, and the remaining measurements (epoch 2 to epoch m) and the
                              new measurement (epoch m + 1) are formed into a new sequence. The relevant parameters
                              of the grey prediction model are recalculated to better accommodate the volatility of the
                              measurements.

                              2.6. UWB/LiDAR-SLAM Integrated Model Based on Factor Graph Optimization
                                   Filtering [38–40] and graph optimization [41–43] are the two main schemes for
                              multisensor data fusion. A Bayesian filtering-based method finds the best estimate of the
                              current state through prediction-measurement-correction, which has the advantages of
                              low computational complexity and high accuracy. As an information transfer model, the
                              optimization methods represented by factor graphs model the observed data as a kind of
                              factor graph network with data association. Unlike the former, which only considers the
                              state information of the last epoch and the measurements of the current epoch, the factor
                              graph performs nonlinear optimization of the overall or partial state data set based on all
                              or part of the historical measurements and the current measurements. Due to the temporal
                              correlation between measurements and the redundant measurements of the system, the
                              integrated system tends to achieve more accurate and robust state estimations.
                                   The framework of the FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated system is shown
                              in Figure 4, where both the UWB LOS and corrected measurements are tightly coupled to
                              LiDAR-SLAM without loop closure using FGO. The navigation system states are
                              represented by the variable nodes (hollow circles), and the a priori information, state
                              transitions, and measurement processes are represented by the factor nodes (solid circles).
                              As seen, the graphical representation makes the system highly versatile and extensible,
                              allowing for the flexible combination of sensor information with different measurement
                              frequencies and effectively coping with sensor failure or the introduction of new sensor
                              information.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                     11 of 22




                              Figure 4. Framework of the FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled integrated system.

                                   The goal of multisensor data fusion is to find the optimal posterior state of the system
                              given the sensor measurements, which is a typical maximum a posteriori (MAP)
                              estimation problem [41,44]. In this study, the measurements include UWB and LiDAR-
                              SLAM measurements. Assuming that the UWB and LiDAR-SLAM measurements are
                              independent of each other, the state estimation problem of the UWB/LiDAR-SLAM
                              integrated system can be formulated as the following MAP problem:


                                                                               χ
                                                                                       ( )
                                                                     χ  = arg max  P z x                                         (14)

                                                                                                                      T
                              where χ denotes the set of system states to be estimated; x =  plg           qlg          denotes the
                                                                                                                      61
                                                g           g
                              state vector; p   l   and q   l   denote the 3-D translation and rotation (denoted by a
                              quaternion) between the l-frame and g-frame, respectively; χ  denotes the set of system
                              optimal states; z denotes the sensor measurements associated with state x.
                                    For any factor graph, the MAP problem can be reduced to maximizing the product
                              of all factor graph potentials [45]:

                                                                      χ  = arg max  ( x )                                       (15)
                                                                                   χ


                              where  ( x ) denotes the factor associated with the measurements.
                                   In an FGO-based integrated model, the sensor measurements are all considered as
                              factors  ( x ) associated with the particular state x, each of which represents an error
                              function that should be minimized. Supposing that all sensor measurements are disturbed
                              by Gaussian noise with a zero mean, the negative logarithm of  ( x ) is proportional to
                              the error function associated with the measurement and is defined as follows:

                                                                                1          2 
                                                                   ( x )  exp  −h( x) − z                                      (16)
                                                                                2          Λ
                                                                                              

                              where h ( x ) and z denote the observation functions and actual measurements of different

                                                                                                         = ( ) Λ−1 ( ) = Λ−1 2
                                                                                                     2       T                       2
                              positioning systems, respectively; the Mahalanobis norm is             Λ
                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                     2

                              which takes into account the effect of the observation accuracy; Λ denotes the
                              covariance matrix of the observation process, in which the UWB and LiDAR-SLAM
                              uncertainties are determined based on the ranging accuracy and the degree of matching,
                              respectively; and      2
                                                         denotes the Euclidean norm of the vector.
                                   Taking the negative logarithm of Equation (15) and discarding the coefficient terms,
                              the MAP problem can be transformed into a nonlinear least squares (NLS) problem:
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                                              12 of 22




                                                            n                                                                                    
                                                                           (              )                    h ( x k −1 , x k ) − zklidar
                                                                                               2
                                           χ  = arg min   h x j , xianchor − zuwb                 
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                      j ,i
                                                                                                     +                                  −1,k lidar 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                               
                                                           j =1 i =1                                                                               
                                                                                                 uwb
                                                     χ                                                 k =2

                                                                                                                                                          (17)
                                                           n                                                                    
                                               = arg min   e j ,i uwb +  ek −1,k lidar ,p +  ek −1,k lidar ,q 
                                                                              2                  2                           2
                                                                       uwb           lidar , p                     lidar ,q

                                                     χ    j =1 i =1          
                                                                                k =2
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           k =2
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                  UWB factor                  LiDAR-SLAM factor                    
                              where the superscripts  and  denote the number of UWB measurement residuals
                              and LiDAR-SLAM measurement residuals; the superscript n denotes the number of UWB
                              anchors; the subscripts j and k denote the indexes of UWB factors and LiDAR-SLAM
                                                                                                               anchor
                              factors in the factor graph; the subscript i denotes the index of UWB anchors; x i
                              denotes the UWB anchor coordinates;                             e uwb
                                                                                                j ,i
                                                                                                     denotes the measurement residuals
                                                                                                                       lidar , p           lidar ,q
                              associated with the UWB sensor (residuals of ranging); and e k −1,k                                  and e k −1,k       denote the
                              measurement residuals associated with the LiDAR sensor (residuals of translation and
                              rotation). The error functions with UWB and LiDAR-SLAM factors are as follows:

                                                                     e uwb = p g + l l − x anchor − r meas
                                                                      j ,i          lj
                                                                                                     2
                                                                      lidar ,p
                                                                                  ( ) (   )
                                                                                           −1
                                                                      e k −1,k = qlk−1  plk − plk−1 − p
                                                                                        g          g   g       meas
                                                                                                                                                            (18)
                                                                      
                                                                                  ( )   ( )
                                                                                           −1               −1
                                                                      e klidar ,q
                                                                                   = qlgk−1  qlgk  q meas
                                                                          −1,k



                              where  denotes the multiplication operator of the quaternion; r meas denotes the actual
                              UWB measurements; and p meas and q meas denote the actual LiDAR-SLAM
                              measurements.
                                   By minimizing the above objective function, the maximum a posteriori solution  
                              of the state set can be obtained, and thus, multisensor data fusion can be realized.
                              Considering that the computation amount will increase significantly with the increase in
                              the factor graph scale as new measurement information is continuously added over time,
                              this study adopts a sliding window method [46] to maintain the relative stability of the
                              number of optimized variables by discarding the earliest historical variables in the
                              window while adding new variables.

                              3. System Performance Testing and Analysis
                              3.1. Platform Description and Experimental Setup
                                   We build an integrated positioning experimental platform to test the proposed NLOS
                              correction method using the grey prediction model and the FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-
                              SLAM integrated system. All algorithms are implemented and evaluated on a computer
                              with an Intel(R) Core(TM) 2.30 GHz i7-10875H central processing unit (CPU), 32 GB of
                              RAM, and an Nvidia GeForce RTX 2060 graphics card, running a 64-bit Linux (Ubuntu
                              18.04) operating system. As shown in Figure 5, a Velodyne VLP-16 scanner is installed in
                              the center of the experimental platform, and a Time Domain UWB PulsON440 module
                              and 360° total reflection prism are installed above the laser scanner. The centers of all three
                              are on the same plumb line; therefore, the effect of the lever-arm on the integrated
                              navigation in the 2-D plane can be ignored. The specifications of the UWB and LiDAR
                              sensors are shown in Table 1. Considering the high-precision performance of the Leica
                              TS50 automatic tracking total station, it is assumed that its measured UWB anchor 3-D
                              coordinates and the starting coordinates of the UWB mobile tag and LiDAR sensor when
                              the experimental platform is stationary are error-free. In the dynamic test, the total station
                              automatically tracks the total reflection prism and provides the reference with an accuracy
                              of 0.6 mm  1 ppm every 0.1 s.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                        13 of 22




                              Figure 5. Experimental platform.

                              Table 1. Specifications of the UWB and LiDAR sensors. The mark—means without this property.

                                                Parameter                        UWB                      LiDAR
                                            Ranging principle                   TW-TOF                     TOF
                                                Wave band                     3.1–4.8 GHz               c/905 nm 1
                                               Range ability                     <80 m                    <100 m
                                                              LOS               5  1 cm
                                  Ranging accuracy                                                        3 cm
                                                             NLOS              uncertain
                                                          Horizontal                                        360°
                                    Field of view                                   —
                                                            Vertical                                        15
                                                          Horizontal                                        0.2°
                                  Angular resolution                                —
                                                            Vertical                                         2°
                                           Sampling frequency                     2 Hz                     10 Hz
                              1   c denotes the speed of light.

                                   A dynamic experiment is conducted in an underground parking lot of a shopping
                              mall, and the experimental scenario and layout are shown in Figure 6. We deploy six UWB
                              anchors in a 40 m × 40 m area to better demonstrate the UWB positioning accuracy
                              fluctuation under a poor geometric distribution. The presence of many moving objects
                              (passing pedestrians and vehicles) and stationary objects (wall pillars (70 cm × 70 cm) and
                              stationary vehicles) in the underground parking lot makes the environment very
                              challenging. For the total station to effectively track the experimental platform and
                              provide an accurate reference trajectory, an evaluation dataset is obtained using ROS by
                              an experimenter pushing the experimental vehicle along a travel lane (purple route) at a
                              speed of 0.5 m/s. The parking space areas are not planned into the travel route considering
                              the continuity of the reference trajectory.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                        14 of 22




                              Figure 6. Experimental layout.

                              3.2. Evaluation of the UWB NLOS Identification and Correction Algorithm
                                   To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed NLOS correction method using the grey
                              prediction model, the time-synchronized UWB raw, LOS, and corrected measurements
                              are all variously used as the inputs to the LS positioning method, and the following three
                              methods are obtained for comparison:
                              •    LS positioning using the raw measurements (LS);
                              •    LS positioning using the LOS measurements (NLOS identification + LS, NI-LS);
                              •    LS positioning using the LOS and corrected measurements (NLOS identification +
                                   NLOS correction + LS, NINC-LS).
                                   Figure 7 shows a comparison of the three UWB measurements with the reference
                              measurement. The error curves between the measurements after discarding the zero value
                              and the reference value are shown in Figure 8 (the subgraphs above the figures are
                              enlarged details of the error curves). Table 2 reports the statistical results of the ranging
                              errors for the three measurements. ‘RMSE’ in the table stands for the root mean square
                              error, and ‘Max’ stands for the maximum error. Figure 9 shows the UWB positioning
                              trajectories solved using the LS, NI-LS, and NINC-LS methods. Figure 10 shows the
                              positioning errors of these three methods in the X, Y, and plane directions and the
                              cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the plane errors. The specific evaluations are
                              shown in Table 3. ‘Availability’ in the table is calculated by dividing the number of solved
                              positions by the total number of measurements.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                               15 of 22




                              Figure 7. Time series of the reference measurements (black), UWB raw measurements (green), LOS
                              measurements (blue) and corrected measurements (red) for different anchors: (a) anchor 1, (b)
                              anchor 2, (c) anchor 3, (d) anchor 4, (e) anchor 5, and (f) anchor 6.




                              Figure 8. Ranging errors of the UWB raw measurements (green), LOS measurements (blue) and
                              pseudo measurements (red) for different anchors: (a) anchor 1, (b) anchor 2, (c) anchor 3, (d) anchor
                              4, (e) anchor 5, and (f) anchor 6.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                              16 of 22




                              Table 2. Performance of different UWB measurements. Four decimal places are given to better
                              compare the difference between the LOS and corrected measurements.

                                                   Anchor 1 Anchor 2 Anchor 3 Anchor 4 Anchor 5 Anchor 6
                                  Raw     RMSE (m) 0.8178    1.3146   0.5012   0.4089   0.4225    1.2918
                              measurements Max (m) 14.9990 36.5315 13.7858     6.4413   7.1004   10.6643
                                  LOS     RMSE (m) 0.0582    0.0529   0.0578   0.0849   0.0915    0.0796
                              measurements Max (m) 0.3179    0.2901   0.3291   0.2933   0.3656    0.2948
                               Corrected RMSE (m) 0.0584     0.0551   0.0568   0.0852   0.0912    0.0809
                              measurements Max (m) 0.3179    0.2901   0.3291   0.2933   0.3656    0.3156




                              Figure 9. Trajectories of the three methods: LS (green), NI-LS (blue) and NINC-LS (red).




                              Figure 10. Positioning errors of the LS (green), NI-LS (blue) and NINC-LS (red) methods: (a) X
                              direction, (b) Y direction, (c) plane direction, and (d) CDF of the positioning errors.

                              Table 3. Accuracy evaluation of the LS, NI-LS, and NINC-LS methods.

                                                                             LS                NI-LS             NINC-LS
                                                          X                 0.635               0.095              0.079
                                  RMSE (m)                Y                 0.721               0.171              0.106
                                                        Plane               0.961               0.196              0.132
                                                          X                 6.165               0.444              0.444
                                   Max (m)                Y                12.131               0.965              0.825
                                                        Plane              12.903               1.001              0.846
                                 Availability                              99.65%              96.84%             100%

                                   It can be observed that the experimental scenario of the underground parking lot is
                              challenging for the UWB positioning system. During the travel process, there are many
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                         17 of 22




                              measurement outliers in the UWB raw measurements due to obstacle occlusion. Anchors
                              1, 2, and 6 have lower ranging accuracy due to their poor surrounding environments (all
                              are located near wall columns), with RMSEs of 0.8178 m, 1.3146 m, and 1.2918 m,
                              respectively. Anchor 2 astonishingly has a maximum ranging error of 36.5315 m.
                              Although the placements of anchors 3, 4, and 5 are more ideal, the RMSEs also reach 0.5012
                              m, 0.4089 m, and 0.4225 m, which are far below the accuracy level under the UWB line-of-
                              sight. After filtering using the NLOS identification algorithm, the data quality of LOS
                              measurements is significantly improved. Compared with the raw measurements, the
                              ranging accuracy of UWB anchors is improved by 92.88%, 95.98%, 88.47%, 79.24%, 78.34%,
                              and 93.84%. Correspondingly, the NI-LS method using LOS measurements has been
                              considerably improved. Compared with the LS method, the RMSEs of the positioning
                              errors in the X, Y and plane directions are reduced by 85.04%, 76.28%, and 79.60%,
                              respectively, and the maximum errors are reduced by 92.80%, 92.05%, and 92.24%,
                              respectively.
                                    Nevertheless, we find that the solved trajectory of NI-LS still partially deviates from
                              the reference trajectory, as shown in the purple dashed region in Figure 9. Taking the cyan
                              point as an example, when the experimental platform moves to the current position, it
                              receives the measurement from anchors 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6, of which anchor 2 is identified as
                              an NLOS anchor. Interestingly, although the ranging accuracy of the remaining LOS
                              anchors generally reaches the subdecimeter level (0.138 m, 0.110 m, 0.136 m, and 0.020 m),
                              the plane error of its solved position still reaches 0.487 m. This result indicates that using
                              only the filtered LOS measurements as the input to the positioning system may still fail to
                              meet the needs for indoor high-precision positioning. This is because the excessive
                              rejection worsens the geometric distribution of the system, and the complete exclusion of
                              the NLOS measurements reduces the system’s availability by 2.81%. Figure 11 shows a
                              comparison between the HDOP value and the NI-LS method error. After effective data
                              quality control, the positioning error of the system is approximately positively correlated
                              with the HDOP value, and variances within different intervals (e.g., 0–50 s) are caused by
                              different levels of ranging accuracy. Therefore, to ensure the robustness of the system,
                              considering the geometric distribution of the remaining LOS anchors during the
                              positioning solution is essential.




                              Figure 11. Time series of the HDOP value (blue) and the NI-LS method error (red).

                                    The corrected ranging values obtained using the proposed method are shown in
                              Figure 9. Based on the threshold judgment principle, the method corrects some of the
                              NLOS measurements to obtain the corrected measurements. Table 2 shows that the
                              corrected measurements maintain almost the same ranging accuracy as the LOS
                              measurements, and the NINC-LS method using the LOS and corrected measurements
                              subsequently achieves a corresponding improvement. In the purple dashed region where
                              the NI-LS solution is worse, the NINC-LS method significantly improves the overall
                              performance of the system under the poor geometric distribution, making it more closely
                              fit the reference trajectory. Compared with the LS and NI-LS methods, the RMSEs of the
                              positioning errors in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced by 87.56%, 85.30%, and
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                          18 of 22




                              86.26% and 16.84%, 38.01%, and 32.65% for the NINC-LS method, respectively. The RMSE
                              in the plane direction is reduced to 0.132 m, which provides solid evidence for the
                              rationality and effectiveness of the proposed method. However, the maximum error
                              improvement is not obvious. Figure 12 shows the number of NLOS measurements for the
                              NI-LS and NINC-LS methods. After correction using the proposed method, the number
                              of NLOS measurements is less than or equal to 3. While outputting high-precision
                              positioning results, the system’s availability reaches 100%, even better than the raw
                              measurement value (99.65%).




                              Figure 12. Number of NLOS measurements for the NI-LS (blue) and NINC-LS (red) methods.

                              3.3. Evaluation of the UWB/LiDAR-SLAM Integrated Positioning Algorithm
                                   The solved trajectories are compared with those of the single sensor, and five other
                              UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated positioning methods to test the effectiveness of the
                              proposed FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled integrated system with NLOS
                              identification and correction using the grey prediction model (NLOS identification +
                              NLOS correction + tightly coupled + FGO, NINC-FGO).
                              •    NINC-LS;
                              •    LeGO-LOAM without loop closure;
                              •    Tightly coupled + REKF (REKF);
                              •    NLOS identification + tightly coupled + REKF (NI-REKF) [27];
                              •    NLOS identification + NLOS correction + tightly coupled + REKF (NINC-REKF);
                              •    Tightly coupled + FGO (FGO);
                              •    NLOS identification + tightly coupled + FGO (NI-FGO).
                                   Figure 13 shows a comparison of the trajectories estimated using the different
                              methods with the reference trajectory. The positioning errors of these eight methods in
                              the X, Y, and plane directions and the CDF of the plane errors are shown in Figure 14.
                              Table 4 reports the positioning performance of each method. In the table, the red, blue,
                              and green results represent the best, second-best, and third-best accuracies, respectively.




                              Figure 13. Trajectories of the eight methods: NINC-LS (yellow), LeGO-LOAM (green), REKF (grey),
                              NI-REKF (cyan), NINC-REKF (magenta), FGO (orange), NI-FGO (blue) and NINC-FGO (red).
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                            19 of 22




                                 Figure 14. Positioning errors of the NINC-LS (yellow), LeGO-LOAM (green), REKF (grey), NI-REKF
                                 (cyan), NINC-REKF (magenta), FGO (orange), NI-FGO (blue) and NINC-FGO (red) methods: (a) X
                                 direction, (b) Y direction, (c) plane direction, and (d) CDF of the positioning errors.

                                 Table 4. Accuracy evaluation of the NINC-LS, LeGO-LOAM, REKF, NI-REKF, NINC-REKF, FGO,
                                 NI-FGO and NINC-FGO methods.

                                          LeGO-                                NINC-                                 NINC-
                              NINC-LS                  REKF       NI-REKF                    FGO       NI-FGO
                                          LOAM                                 REKF                                   FGO
                      X        0.079       0.097       0.081        0.080       0.071        0.111       0.068        0.062
 RMSE (m)             Y        0.106       0.091       0.085        0.073       0.069        0.101       0.063        0.060
                    Plane      0.132       0.133       0.117        0.108       0.099        0.150       0.092        0.086
                      X        0.444       0.239       0.383        0.299       0.262        2.584       0.294        0.259
  Max (m)             Y        0.825       0.343       0.578        0.295       0.295        1.955       0.297        0.270
                    Plane      0.846       0.419       0.595        0.361       0.358        2.645       0.327        0.303
Availability                   100%        100%        100%         100%       100%          100%        100%        100%
   CDF
                               60.31%     24.47%       57.36%      58.60%      63.44%       74.95%      75.23%       77.93%
 (<0.1 m)

                                      As seen in Table 4, the REKF method significantly improves the positioning
                                 performance of the integrated system by adjusting the measurement noise covariance
                                 matrix to reduce the contribution of abnormal measurements to parameter estimation
                                 when the UWB raw measurements polluted from NLOS errors are used directly as the
                                 input to the integrated system. It outperforms the NI-LS method (RMSEs in the X, Y, and
                                 plane directions are reduced by −2.53%, 19.81%, and 11.36%, respectively) and LeGO-
                                 LOAM (RMSEs in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced by 16.49%, 6.59%, and
                                 12.03%, respectively). However, the FGO method, which assigns the same weights to
                                 measurements of different qualities, achieves a positioning accuracy inferior to that of a
                                 single sensor (NINC-LS or LeGO-LOAM methods). Furthermore, if we define the
                                 availability as the error below 0.1 m due to the temporal correlation between
                                 measurements and the redundant system measurements, the FGO method (74.95%) is far
                                 superior to the REKF method (57.36%).
                                      The advantages of the integrated positioning methods are manifested when the raw
                                 measurements are filtered once using the NLOS identification method. Both the NI-REKF
                                 and the NI-FGO methods achieve better accuracy than that of a single sensor. Compared
                                 with the conventional integrated model (REKF or FGO methods), the RMSEs of the
                                 positioning errors in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced by 1.23%, 14.12%, and
                                 7.69% and 38.74%, 37.62%, and 38.67%, respectively. Meanwhile, the NI-FGO method
                                 outperforms the NI-REKF method, reducing the RMSEs of the positioning errors in the X,
                                 Y, and plane directions by 15.00%, 13.70%, and 14.81%, respectively.
                                      Comparing the six UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated positioning methods, whether the
                                 REKF-based integrated framework or the FGO-based integrated framework, the proposed
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                       20 of 22




                              methods (NINC-REKF and NINC-FGO methods), which use the LOS and corrected
                              measurements as the inputs to the integrated system, achieve optimal results in their
                              respective frameworks. Such improvements illustrate that the proposed methods for
                              controlling the sensor data quality (NLOS identification + NLOS correction) can
                              effectively improve the positioning performance of the UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated
                              system. Compared with the REKF and NI-REKF methods, the RMSEs of the NINC-REKF
                              method in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced to 0.071 m, 0.069 m, and 0.099 m,
                              respectively. Compared with the FGO and NI-FGO methods, the RMSEs of the NINC-
                              FGO method in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced to 0.062 m, 0.060 m, and 0.086
                              m, respectively. Similarly, the NINC-FGO method achieves better results than the NINC-
                              REKF method (RMSEs in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced by 12.68%, 13.04%,
                              and 13.13%, respectively), and even the NI-FGO method outperforms the NINC-REKF
                              method (RMSEs in the X, Y, and plane directions are reduced by 4.23%, 8.70%, and 7.07%,
                              respectively), which fully demonstrates the superiority of the FGO-based UWB/LiDAR-
                              SLAM integrated model.
                                   Since the system models are designed based on a tightly coupled model, the
                              availability of the six integrated methods is 100%. Similarly, if we define the availability
                              as the error below 0.1 m, then it can be seen from Figure 14d that the FGO-based integrated
                              models all outperform the REKF-based integrated models. The availability of the NINC-
                              FGO method is as high as 77.93%, which is better than that of any other method. In
                              summary, the NINC-FGO method performs best when both accuracy and availability are
                              considered, which fully verifies the superiority and accuracy of the proposed
                              UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated system.

                              4. Conclusions
                                    A UWB/LiDAR-SLAM integrated system is an effective solution to address the
                              difficulty of precise positioning in GNSS-denied environments. However, the existence of
                              UWB NLOS errors will affect the accuracy and effectiveness of the integrated system to
                              varying degrees. For better fusion, we do the following. First, we use our previous work
                              on UWB NLOS identification and exclusion to strictly control the data quality of the
                              system input. Second, considering that the system positioning accuracy is affected not
                              only by the ranging accuracy but also by the geometric distribution of UWB anchors, we
                              calculate the HDOP value of the remaining LOS anchors to evaluate the layout accuracy.
                              Then, for a poor geometric distribution, we propose an NLOS correction method using a
                              grey prediction model. The high accuracy and robustness of the integrated system are
                              effectively maintained by increasing the measurements. Finally, an FGO-based
                              UWB/LiDAR-SLAM tightly coupled integrated system is designed. The evaluations of the
                              dynamic positioning experiment show the following. (1) The corrected measurements
                              constructed using the grey prediction model maintain almost the same ranging accuracy
                              as the LOS measurements. The NINC-LS method using the LOS and corrected
                              measurements as the system inputs also achieves satisfactory results, with the RMSE in
                              the plane direction reduced to 0.132 m and the availability of errors below 0.1 m reaching
                              60.31%, proving the effectiveness of the proposed NLOS correction method. (2) The
                              proposed FGO-based integrated models are all superior to the REKF-based integrated
                              models. The NINC-FGO method takes the optimal positioning effect and robustness, with
                              an RMSE of 0.086 m in the plane direction and 77.93% availability of errors below 0.1 m,
                              thus fully demonstrating the superiority of the proposed method. In the future, our work
                              will include the integration of the existing integrated system with low-cost inertial
                              measurement units (IMUs) to enhance the accuracy and robustness of the positioning
                              system in highly dynamic and degrading environments.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                        21 of 22




                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.C. and A.X.; data curation, Z.C., Y.H. and C.Z.; formal
                                   analysis, Z.C., X.S. and Z.S.; funding acquisition, A.X.; investigation, Z.C.; methodology, Z.C. and
                                   X.S.; software, Z.C.; validation, Z.C., Y.H. and C.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, Z.C.;
                                   writing—review and editing, Z.C., A.X., X.S., Y.H., C.Z. and Z.S. All authors have read and agreed
                                   to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was funded in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
                                   (No.42074012), in part by the Liaoning Key Research and Development Program (No.
                                   2020JH2/10100044), in part by the Liaoning Revitalization Talents Program (Nos. XLYC2002101;
                                   XLYC2008034), and in part by the Fundamental Research Program of the Liaoning Education
                                   Department (No. LJ2020JCL016).
                                   Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Wang, H.; Wang, C.; Xie, L. Intensity-slam: Intensity assisted localization and mapping for large scale environment. IEEE Robot.
      Autom. Lett. 2021, 6, 1715–1721.
2.    Zhen, W.; Scherer, S. Estimating the localizability in tunnel-like environments using LiDAR and UWB. In Proceedings of the
      2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Montreal, QC, Canada, 20–24 May 2019.
3.    Xu, W.; Cai, Y.; He, D.; Lin, J.; Zhang, F. Fast-lio2: Fast direct lidar-inertial odometry. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2022, 38, 2053–2073.
4.    Yokozuka, M.; Koide, K.; Oishi, S.; Banno, A. LiTAMIN: LiDAR-based Tracking and Mapping by Stabilized ICP for Geometry
      Approximation with Normal Distributions. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
      and Systems (IROS), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 24 October–24 January 2021.
5.    Yokozuka, M.; Koide, K.; Oishi, S.; Banno, A. LiTAMIN2: Ultra light lidar-based slam using geometric approximation applied
      with KL-divergence. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an,
      China, 30 May–5 June 2021.
6.    Hong, S.; Ko, H.; Kim, J. VICP: Velocity updating iterative closest point algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International
      Conference on Robotics and Automation, Anchorage, AK, USA, 3–7 May 2010.
7.    Yang, J.; Li, H.; Jia, Y. Go-icp: Solving 3d registration efficiently and globally optimally. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
      Conference on Computer Vision, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 1–8 December 2013.
8.    Stoyanov, T.; Magnusson, M.; Andreasson, H.; Lilienthal, A.J. Fast and accurate scan registration through minimization of the
      distance between compact 3D NDT representations. Int. J. Robot. Res. 2012, 31, 1377–1393.
9.    Zhou, Z.; Zhao, C.; Adolfsson, D.; Su, S.; Gao, Y.; Duckett, T.; Sun, L. Ndt-transformer: Large-scale 3d point cloud localisation
      using the normal distribution transform representation. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
      and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China, 30 May–5 June 2021.
10.   Zhang, J.; Singh, S. Low-drift and real-time lidar odometry and mapping. Auton. Robot. 2017, 41, 401–416.
11.   Shan, T.; Englot, B. Lego-loam: Lightweight and ground-optimized lidar odometry and mapping on variable terrain. In
      Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Madrid, Spain, 1–5
      October 2018.
12.   Pan, Y.; Xiao, P.; He, Y.; Shao, Z.; Li, Z. MULLS: Versatile LiDAR SLAM via multi-metric linear least square. In Proceedings of
      the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China, 30 May–5 June 2021.
13.   Wen, C.; Tan, J.; Li, F.; Wu, C.; Lin, Y.; Wang, Z.; Wang, C. Cooperative indoor 3D mapping and modeling using LiDAR data.
      Inf. Sci. 2021, 574, 192–209.
14.   Droeschel, D.; Behnke, S. Efficient continuous-time SLAM for 3D lidar-based online mapping. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
      International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 21–25 May 2018.
15.   Chang, L.; Niu, X.; Liu, T.; Tang, J.; Qian, C. GNSS/INS/LiDAR-SLAM integrated navigation system based on graph
      optimization. Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1009.
16.   Sun, W.; Xue, M.; Yu, H.; Tang, H.; Lin, A. Augmentation of fingerprints for indoor WiFi localization based on Gaussian process
      regression. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2018, 67, 10896–10905.
17.   Chen, J.; Zhou, B.; Bao, S.; Liu, X.; Gu, Z.; Li, L.; Zhao, Y.; Zhu, J.; Li, Q. A data-driven inertial navigation/Bluetooth fusion
      algorithm for indoor localization. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 22, 5288–5301.
18.   Achroufene, A.; Amirat, Y.; Chibani, A. RSS-based indoor localization using belief function theory. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.
      2018, 16, 1163–1180.
19.   Yang, P.; Wu, W.; Moniri, M.; Chibelushi, C.C. Efficient object localization using sparsely distributed passive RFID tags. IEEE
      Trans. Ind. Electron. 2012, 60, 5914–5924.
20.   Ozdenizci, B.; Coskun, V.; Ok, K. NFC internal: An indoor navigation system. Sensors 2015, 15, 7571–7595.
21.   Silva, B.; Hancke, G.P. Ranging error mitigation for through-the-wall non-line-of-sight conditions. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2020,
      16, 6903–6911.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 4258                                                                                                    22 of 22




22.   Yang, X.; Wang, J.; Song, D.; Feng, B.; Ye, H. A novel NLOS error compensation method based IMU for UWB indoor positioning
      system. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21, 11203–11212.
23.   Xiao, Z.; Wen, H.; Markham, A.; Trigoni, N.; Blunsom, P.; Frolik, J. Non-line-of-sight identification and mitigation using
      received signal strength. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2014, 14, 1689–1702.
24.   Dong, M. A low-cost NLOS identification and mitigation method for UWB ranging in static and dynamic environments. IEEE
      Commun. Lett. 2021, 25, 2420–2424.
25.   Schroeder, J.; Galler, S.; Kyamakya, K.; Jobmann, K. NLOS detection algorithms for ultra-wideband localization. In Proceedings
      of the 2007 4th Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communication, Hannover, Germany, 22 March 2007.
26.   Wei, J.; Wang, H.; Su, S.; Tang, Y.; Guo, X.; Sun, X. NLOS identification using parallel deep learning model and time-frequency
      information in UWB-based positioning system. Measurement 2022, 195, 111191.
27.   Chen, Z.; Xu, A.; Sui, X.; Wang, C.; Wang, S.; Gao, J.; Shi, Z. Improved-UWB/LiDAR-SLAM Tightly Coupled Positioning System
      with NLOS Identification Using a LiDAR Point Cloud in GNSS-Denied Environments. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 1380.
28.   Wymeersch, H.; Maranò, S.; Gifford, W.M.; Win, M.Z. A machine learning approach to ranging error mitigation for UWB
      localization. IEEE Trans. Commun. 2012, 60, 1719–1728.
29.   Savic, V.; Ferrer-Coll, J.; Ängskog, P.; Chilo, J.; Stenumgaard, P.; Larsson, E.G. Measurement analysis and channel modeling for
      TOA-based ranging in tunnels. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2014, 14, 456–467.
30.   Van Nguyen, T.; Jeong, Y.; Shin, H.; Win, M.Z. Machine learning for wideband localization. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 2015, 33,
      1357–1380.
31.   Tian, Q.; Kevin, I.; Wang, K.; Salcic, Z. Human body shadowing effect on UWB-based ranging system for pedestrian tracking.
      IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2018, 68, 4028–4037.
32.   Ferreira, A.G.; Fernandes, D.; Branco, S.; Catarino, A.P.; Monteiro, J.L. Feature Selection for Real-Time NLOS Identification and
      Mitigation for Body-Mounted UWB Transceivers. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2021, 70, 1–10.
33.   Venkatesh, S.; Buehrer, R.M. NLOS mitigation using linear programming in ultrawideband location-aware networks. IEEE
      Trans. Veh. Technol. 2007, 56, 3182–3198.
34.   Zhou, H.; Yao, Z.; Lu, M. Lidar/UWB fusion based SLAM with anti-degeneration capability. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2020, 70,
      820–830.
35.   Liu, R.; He, Y.; Yuen, C.; Lau, B.P.L.; Ali, R.; Fu, W.; Cao, Z. Cost-effective mapping of mobile robot based on the fusion of uwb
      and short-range 2-d lidar. IEEE-ASME Trans. Mech. 2021, 27, 1321–1331.
36.   Feng, D.; Wang, C.; He, C.; Zhuang, Y.; Xia, X.G. Kalman-filter-based integration of IMU and UWB for high-accuracy indoor
      positioning and navigation. IEEE Internet Things 2020, 7, 3133–3146.
37.   Lian, R.J. Grey-prediction self-organizing fuzzy controller for robotic motion control. Inf. Sci. 2012, 202, 73–89.
38.   Qin, H.; Yue, S.; Cong, L.; Jin, T. A state-constrained tracking approach for Kalman filter-based ultra-tightly coupled GPS/INS
      integration. GPS Solut. 2019, 23, 1–13.
39.   Abosekeen, A.; Iqbal, U.; Noureldin, A.; Korenberg, M.J. A novel multi-level integrated navigation system for challenging GNSS
      environments. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. 2020, 22, 4838–4852.
40.   Li, W.; Liu, G.; Cui, X.; Lu, M. Feature-Aided RTK/LiDAR/INS Integrated Positioning System with Parallel Filters in the
      Ambiguity-Position-Joint Domain for Urban Environments. Remote Sens. 2021, 13, 2013.
41.   Wen, W.; Kan, Y.C.; Hsu, L.T. Performance comparison of GNSS/INS integrations based on EKF and factor graph optimization.
      In Proceedings of the 32nd International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+
      2019), Miami, FL, USA, 16–20 September 2019.
42.   Li, S.; Li, G.; Wang, L.; Qin, Y. SLAM integrated mobile mapping system in complex urban environments. ISPRS J. Photogramm.
      Remote Sens. 2020, 166, 316–332.
43.   Song, Y.; Hsu, L.T. Tightly coupled integrated navigation system via factor graph for UAV indoor localization. Aerosp. Sci.
      Technol. 2021, 108, 106370.
44.   Barfoot, T.D. State Estimation for Robotics; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2017.
45.   Kaess, M.; Johannsson, H.; Roberts, R.; Ila, V.; Leonard, J.J.; Dellaert, F. iSAM2: Incremental smoothing and mapping using the
      Bayes tree. Int. J. Robot. Res. 2012, 31, 216–235.
46.   Sibley, G.; Matthies, L.; Sukhatme, G. Sliding window filter with application to planetary landing. J. Field Robot. 2010, 27, 587–
      608.
