               remote sensing
Article
Ranging Offset Calibration and Moving Average Filter Enhanced
Reliable UWB Positioning in Classic User Environments
Junhao Liu, Zhouzheng Gao * , Yan Li                           , Siao Lv, Jia Liu and Cheng Yang


                                              School of Land Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences Beijing, Beijing 100083, China;
                                              liujunhao1104@email.cugb.edu.cn (J.L.); liyan0415@email.cugb.edu.cn (Y.L.); lvsiao1206@email.cugb.edu.cn (S.L.);
                                              liujia1201@email.cugb.edu.cn (J.L.); c.yang@connect.polyu.hk (C.Y.)
                                              * Correspondence: zz.gao@cugb.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-010-8232-1807


                                              Abstract: With the rapid development of the Internet of Things (IoT), the positioning accuracy
                                              requirement of the IoT is increasing, especially for those applications without Global Navigation
                                              Satellite System (GNSS) signals. Ultra-Wideband (UWB) is treated as a high-accuracy positioning
                                              method that can be utilized in GNSS-blocked environments. However, UWB’s performance is still
                                              limited when it is applied in practical applications due to errors such as Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS)
                                              errors, multipath errors, and systematic errors in UWB range values. To constrain the impacts of
                                              these mentioned errors on UWB positioning accuracy, this work proposes a novel UWB positioning
                                              model by introducing a UWB ranging offset calibration algorithm and a moving average filter into
                                              a robust extended Kalman filter. In such a UWB positioning model, the ranging offset calibration
                                              algorithm is employed to limit the infuence of UWB systematic errors, and the prior residual-based
                                              IGG-III weighting model is used to restrain the impacts of NLOS and multipath errors. The moving
                                              average filter is to further decrease the impact of the measuring noise on UWB positioning parameter
                                              estimation. To investigate the effectiveness of this proposed method, three sets of UWB experiments
                                              are arranged in three classic user environments. The experimental results show that (1) after applying
                                              the UWB ranging offset calibration algorithm, UWB positioning accuracies in classic environments,
Citation: Liu, J.; Gao, Z.; Li, Y.; Lv, S.;   namely indoor condition, outdoor condition, and transition area are increased by 50.3%, 20.2%,
Liu, J.; Yang, C. Ranging Offset              and 46.9%, respectively; (2) the moving average filter can effectively improve the smoothness of
Calibration and Moving Average                UWB positioning results in terms of standard deviation; (3) the prior residual-based robust theory
Filter Enhanced Reliable UWB
                                              brings about 49.4% and 25.2% positioning improvements to horizontal and vertical components
Positioning in Classic User
                                              under poor measurement quality conditions, but such improvements are rather slight when there
Environments. Remote Sens. 2024, 16,
                                              are good-quality measurements; and (4) after applying the ranging offset calibration algorithm and
2511. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                              moving average filter to the robust EKF together, the elevation accuracy of UWB positioning is
rs16142511
                                              increased by 67.1%, 22.2%, and 50.5%, respectively, in the three classic user environments.
Academic Editors: Paolo Dabove,
Andrzej Stateczny and Vincenzo Di             Keywords: ranging offset calibration; moving average filter; prior residual-based robust model;
Pietra
                                              ultra-wideband; complex user environments
Received: 27 April 2024
Revised: 13 June 2024
Accepted: 3 July 2024
Published: 9 July 2024                        1. Introduction
                                                   The development of the Internet of Things (IoT) brings a requirement for higher
                                              positioning accuracy in both indoor and outdoor environments. Currently, the Global Navi-
                                              gation Satellite System (GNSS) is a helpful system to provide positioning services for users
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
                                              in outdoor scenes with different positioning accuracy levels (meter level, decimeter level,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                              centimeter level, even millimeter level), which can satisfy users’ positioning requirements
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                              in daily life. However, the precondition for using GNSS is that enough available GNSS
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                              satellites (at least four satellites for a single GNSS system, i.e., GPS (Global Positioning
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://         System)) are observed at each epoch [1]. However, such a precondition for the usage of
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/              GNSS in indoor environments is an unreasonable expectation because of the blocked GNSS
4.0/).                                        signals [2], which makes GNSS unsuitable for indoor positioning [3]. For example, He et al.




Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs16142511                                             https://www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                            2 of 18



                              (2017) tried to realize precision navigation and positioning in a library in Shanghai through
                              GPS/BDS (Beidou Navigation Satellite System), and it was verified that the GPS/BDS
                              positioning structure could not meet the accuracy requirements of indoor positioning [4].
                                    To provide positioning services in indoor conditions, positioning technologies such
                              as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), ZigBee,
                              Ultra-Wideband (UWB), pseudolites, Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM),
                              cameras, LED lights, ultrasound, gyroscopes, accelerometers, magnetometers, etc., are
                              utilized currently [5]. Among these existing indoor positioning technologies, UWB is based
                              on a signal with a large frequency bandwidth (>500 MHz) for ranging, with the significant
                              characteristics of a high transmission rate, low consumption, and strong anti-interference [6].
                              The pulse-based distance measuring accuracy is highly related to the bandwidth. Applying
                              a large frequency bandwidth can provide higher temporal and spatial ranges. Currently,
                              UWB is being widely used in indoor positioning [7]. A conventional UWB positioning
                              algorithm is based on the spatial resection principle [8], which is realized by using the
                              distances between UWB base stations and the user tag [9]. The coordinates of the user
                              tag are calculated with the preconditions of the given base stations’ coordinates and the
                              measured distances [10]. Such a method can provide high-accuracy positioning results
                              under line-of-sight conditions, but its signal propagation is susceptible to the external
                              environment, which leads to gross errors in the range value and ultimately decreases the
                              positioning accuracy [11]. UWB positioning is realized by using short pulse signals to
                              measure the messages such as arrival time, arrival angle, and signal strength [12]. However,
                              these short pulse signals are susceptible to multipath and Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) errors,
                              which are resulting in positioning accuracy degradation [13].
                                    To minimize the influence of NLOS errors on UWB positioning accuracy, scholars
                              have conducted some studies in the past. For example, the Kalman filter (KF) instead of
                              Least Square (LS) is used to estimate parameters under the assumption that the residuals
                              obey the Gaussian distribution with a mean value of zero [14]. According to the conclusion
                              in [15], the Kalman filter can partially limit the impacts of multipath and NLOS errors.
                              From the works at present, there are three main approaches for handling the two errors.
                              The first one is to directly identify LOS (Line-of-Sight) signals and NLOS signals. In [16],
                              an LOS/NLOS identification scheme based on a hybrid method of deep learning and
                              transfer learning is provided. However, the NLOS signal recognition model based on
                              deep learning is often only applicable in a similar environment and is hardly applied in a
                              changing environment [17]. The second approach is realized by adjusting the weight of the
                              NLOS error-polluted observations, but to eliminate the NLOS error. In this approach, two
                              stages, namely NLOS identification and weight function construction, are included. As
                              shown in [18], the identification of the NLOS error is accomplished by setting a threshold
                              for residuals. Then, the IGGIII model is introduced to reset the weight of these NLOS
                              error-polluted observations, which effectively enhances the robustness of the positioning
                              algorithm. The work in [19] presented the existence of NLOS-caused ranging errors and
                              evaluated the influence of the NLOS error on UWB ranging accuracy through a real indoor
                              field test. This leads to the third approach to reduce the impact of the NLOS error, which
                              estimates the influence of the NLOS on the ranging value by parameter estimation and
                              directly corrects the ranging value before position estimation [20]. In the study of [20], a
                              convolutional neural network-based method is applied to estimate the UWB distance error
                              caused by the NLOS error without prior knowledge of the LOS and NLOS. Nevertheless,
                              such an estimation of ranging deviation based on neural networks is usually sensitive
                              to the environment and needs complex migration algorithms, which makes it hard to
                              deal with complex and variable environments in field applications [21]. In addition to
                              the influence of the NLOS error and multipath error on the UWB ranging value, the
                              measuring noise and UWB ranging offset will also influence the UWB ranging value. For
                              example, even in the LOS and open observation scenarios, UWB ranging residuals still
                              do not obey the zero-centered Gaussian distribution [22]. In the study of [23], the ranging
                              calibration-influencing factors such as the received power level, the ranging distance, the
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                        3 of 18



                              environmental conditions, and LOS/NLOS were evaluated. The experimental results
                              indicated that the received power level and the ranging distance present a notable effect
                              on the ranging error. To improve the smoothness of UWB positioning results, the work
                              in [24] used the moving average filter to smooth the UWB ranging values, resulting in
                              smooth UWB positioning solutions in indoor environments. Based on this work and
                              furtherly limiting the impacts of poor-quality UWB measurements at previous epochs on
                              the moving average filter, this paper constructs a selective moving average filter based
                              on the recognition results of NLOS and/or multipath errors to smooth the UWB ranging
                              value reliably.
                                   With the development of multi-sensor integration, sensors like Inertial Measurement
                              Units (IMU) and GNSS are used to enhance low-accuracy range detection and positioning
                              accuracy upgradation. For example, the work of [18] integrated UWB ranges with IMU
                              data to predict the positioning results in the areas affected by NLOS errors, which weakens
                              the impact of the NLOS on UWB positioning and provides continuous positioning results in
                              complex environments. The IMU-based Pedestrian Dead Reckoning (PDR) was integrated
                              with UWB [25], which can significantly improve the UWB accuracy of positioning in both
                              LOS and NLOS environments. The work in [26] proposed a tight integration among
                              GNSS, UWB, and visual–inertial odometry to improve the accuracy and reliability of the
                              autonomous vehicle’s seamless positioning in challenging environments.
                                   According to the existing works on UWB positioning, researchers pay attention to
                              improving the UWB positioning accuracy by reducing the influences of NLOS and/or
                              multipath errors. However, the UWB ranging based on the short pulse signal measuring
                              leads to a ranging system offset, which may be different for each UWB tag. Such a UWB
                              base–tag pair-dependent offset actually cannot be estimated as parameters in the UWB
                              positioning filter, which will lead to UWB positioning accuracy loss. Therefore, this paper
                              provided a reliable UWB positioning model based on the augmentations of a ranging offset
                              calibration, a prior residual-based robust EKF, and a moving average filter. The main
                              contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
                              1.   We introduced a ranging offset calibration and moving average filter into the prior
                                   residual-based robust extended Kalman filter, which can provide higher accuracy and
                                   reliability for UWB positioning solutions.
                              2.   This paper has provided a convenient ranging offset calibration scheme, which can
                                   effectively improve the positioning accuracy only by using a short period of static
                                   UWB observation.
                              3.   This paper constructs a robust weight function-based selective moving average filter
                                   to smooth the UWB results, by which the UWB positioning accuracy will be hardly
                                   influenced by the NLOS-polluted UWB ranges at previous epochs.
                              4.   Three sets of UWB datasets from classic user scenarios (indoor, outdoor, and transform
                                   areas) are used to investigate the performance of the presented UWB positioning
                                   method.
                                   The structure of this paper is arranged as follows: In the Section 2, the mathematical
                              models of the UWB system ranging offset calibration method, the moving average filter
                              model, and the robust EKF based on predictive residuals are presented in detail. Then, the
                              experimental methods and data analysis/discussion follow in the Section 3. Finally, the
                              Section 5 summarizes the conclusions of this contribution.

                              2. Methods
                                   In this section, mathematical models including conventional UWB positioning func-
                              tions, the UWB system ranging offset calibration method, the moving average filter model,
                              and the prior residual-based robust EKF are presented in detail.

                              2.1. Conventional UWB Positioning Model
                                   The extended Kalman filter, which is used under the assumptions of a Gaussian
                              distribution and independent observations, is widely adopted for parameter estimation.
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                                                 4 of 18



                              The state function and observation function for the EKF-based UWB positioning model can
                              be expressed as              
                                                                Xk = FXk−1 + ωk , ωk ∼ N (0, Qk )
                                                                                                                                (1)
                                                                Zk = h(Xk ) + vk , vk ∼ N (0, Rk )
                                                .       .         . T                                               . . .
                              where Xk = xk , x k , yk , yk , zk , zk   represents the motion state (( x, y, z) and x, y, z are
                                                                                                                        T
                              the position and speed) of the target at k epoch [27]; Zk = d1,k d2,k           . . . dm,k    is the
                              observation vector (dm,k is the UWB range between the mth UWB base station and UWB
                              target at the k epoch); ωk and vk are the state noise and the observation noise, which obey
                              the Gaussian distribution with the mean values of zero and the corresponding variances of
                              Qk and Rk .
                                   For the EKF-based UWB positioning model, h(Xk ) can be defined as [28]
                                                                       q
                                                      h (Xk ) =              ( x k − x i )2 + ( y k − y i )2 + ( z k − z i )2                                  (2)

                              where (xi , yi , zi ) are the coordinates of the ith UWB base station.
                                  Accordingly, the state model of the UWB positioning model based on EKF is realized
                              by
                                                                          "                                 #
                                                                                F k | k − 1 X k − 1 + ωk − 1
                                                             
                                                               Xk | k −1
                                                                          =                                       (3)
                                                               Pk | k −1     Fk|k−1 Xk−1 FTk|k−1 + Qk−1

                              with
                                                                                    1        T     0         0      0        0
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                    
                                                                                   0        1     0         0      0        0         
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                   0        0     1         T      0        0         
                                                                  F=                                                                                         (4)
                                                                    
                                                                                   0        0     0         1      0        0         
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                   0        0     0         0      1        T         
                                                                                    0        0     0         0      0        1
                              where Xk|k−1 is the predicted motion state of the UWB target at the kth epoch; F is the state
                              transition matrix, which is established based on the constant velocity model [29]; T is the
                              sampling interval.
                                   The observation function of the EKF-based UWB positioning model can be expressed
                              as                         "                                         #
                                                                   Xk|k−1 + K(Zk − h(Xk|k−1 ))
                                                  
                                                    Xk
                                                          =                                                             (5)
                                                    Pk        (I − KHk )Pk|k−1 (I − KHk )T + KRk KT
                              with
                                                                                                                                             −1
                                                              K = Pk | k −1 Hk T (Hk Pk | k −1 Hk T + Rk )                                                     (6)
                              and                              x k | k −1 − x 1                 y k | k −1 − y 1                z k | k −1 − z 1       
                                                                      ˆ                 0                           0                               0
                                                               x d1,k− x                               dˆ1,k                           dˆ1,k
                                                               k | k −1 2                       y k | k −1 − y 2                z k | k −1 − z 2      
                                                               dˆ                      0                           0                               0
                                                                       2,k                              dˆ2,k                           dˆ2,k          
                                                    Hk = 
                                                                       ..              ..              ..              ..              ..
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                    ..        (7)
                                                                        .               .               .               .               .           .
                                                                 x k | k −1 − x m                y k | k −1 − y m                z k | k −1 − z m
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                        0                           0                               0
                                                                        dˆm,k                           dˆm,k                           dˆm,k
                                                          q
                                                dˆm,k =       ( x k | k −1 − x m )2 + ( y k | k −1 − y m )2 + ( z k | k −1 − z m )2                            (8)

                              where H(Xk ) is calculated by applying Taylor series expansion to Equation (2) around
                              Xk | k −1 .

                              2.2. UWB Ranging Offset Calibration Model
                                   As mentioned, UWB positioning results often exhibit a significant offset in the altitude
                              direction. One of the most important facts for this offset is the UWB ranging offset. There-
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                         5 of 18



                              fore, this paper proposes a UWB ranging offset calibration and compensation method to
                              improve UWB positioning accuracy, particularly in the altitude direction. The method can
                              be described as follows. Under static conditions, the true distances between the UWB base
                              stations and UWB tag can be accurately measured by using a total station, marked as a
                                                                     T
                              distance vector d = d1 d2      . . . dm    . The ranging offset value can be expressed as

                                                                        εk,i = di − Zk,i                               (9)

                              where Zk,i represents the UWB ranging value from the tag to the ith base node at the k
                              epoch, εk,i represents the corresponding ranging offset. In this paper, the root mean square
                              of ε is used to reflect the ranging offset.
                                                                               s
                                                                                   ∑kk= n 2
                                                                                      =1 εk,i
                                                                       εei =                                          (10)
                                                                                       n

                              where n is the total epoch number for static UWB observations.
                                   According to the calibrated ranging offset for each UWB base station, the observations
                              are compensated by
                                                                    Ẑk,i = Zk,i − εei                                (11)

                              2.3. Prior Residual-Based Robust Algorithm
                                   As is known, multipath and NLOS errors are the two main factors reducing UWB
                              positioning accuracy and robustness in practical positioning services, which makes UWB
                              positioning accuracy difficult to satisfy high-accuracy positioning requirements while
                              suffering poor observation environments; such two factors are usually mixed and appear as
                              a total ranging error. The conventional method to limit the impacts of the mixed multipath
                              and NLOS errors is to introduce a robust theory based on posterior UWB ranging residuals.
                              In such a kind of method, the posterior residuals would be polluted by poor-quality
                              observations. Therefore, this paper presented a robust model based on the prior residuals,
                              which can theoretically avoid the impacts of multipath and NLOS errors at the current
                              epoch completely. Similarly, the standardized prior residuals are used to detect the quality
                              of observations.
                                                                 V         Z − h(Xk|k−1,i )
                                                        e k,i = p k,i = q k,i
                                                        V                                                             (12)
                                                                  Dk,i    (Hk P     Hk T + Rk )
                                                                                        k | k −1         i,i

                              where Vk,i represents the prior residual of the ith UWB base station with respect to the k
                              epoch, and Dk is the variance of the kth epoch based on the prediction residuals.
                                   Then, the IGG-III weighting function [30] is employed to calculate the robustness
                              factor for each UWB ranging observation.
                                                            
                                                             1, V
                                                                  e k,i ≤ α0
                                                            
                                                                                       2
                                                             e 
                                                     γk,i =   | Vk,i |     α   − α                                    (13)
                                                                             1     0
                                                                                           , α0 ≤ V
                                                                                                  e k,i ≤ α1
                                                            
                                                               α0       α1 − |Ve k,i |
                                                            
                                                             ∞, V
                                                                    e k,i > α1

                              where α0 and α1 are constants, with setting α0 to 1.0–1.5 and α1 to 2.5–8 [31].
                                   The prior variance Rk in the extended Kalman filter is then updated based on the
                              equation of Rk = γk Rk , which can effectively overcome the impact of multipath and NLOS
                              errors on parameter estimation.
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                        6 of 18



                                  2.4. Moving Average Filter Model
                                       Since the smoothness of UWB positioning solutions is influenced by the observing
                                  noise, a moving average filter [32] is applied in this work after applying the ranging offset
                                  calibration model and the prior residual-based robust algorithm.

                                                                                 ∑ii= k
                                                                                    =k−(s−1) Zi
                                                                          Zk =                                                       (14)
                                                                                        s

                                                                                 ∑ii= k
                                                                                    =k−(s−1) Ri
                                                                          R
                                                                          ek =                                          (15)
                                                                                  s2
                                  where s represents the window size of the moving average filter. The window size will
                                  determine the influence of the observation data at previous epochs on those of the current
                                  epoch. According to statistical results, the selection of the window size should consider
                                  the data rate and motion state. Moreover, such a moving average filter decreases the
                                  impact of observation noise obeying Gaussian distribution; therefore, there would be
                                  no enhancements to the positioning accuracy but it would make the positioning results
                                  smoother. However, when there is poor-quality observation (observation noise does not
                                  obey the Gaussian distribution) at previous epochs, they could even decrease the accuracy
                                  of observation at the current epoch.

                                  2.5. Algorithm Overview
                                             The algorithm used in this paper can be mainly divided into four parts (as shown in
                                      Figure 1), namely ranging offset generation, ranging offset calibration, prior residual-based
                                      EKF, and moving average filter, respectively. Before applying UWB positioning, static UWB
                                      data are collected to calculate the UWB ranging offsets for each base–tag pair based on
                                      Equation (10). Then, such ranging offsets are used to compensate for the ranging offsets of
                                      the UWB range values based on Equation (11) before they are used to estimate coordinates.
                                      After the ranging offset calibration, the prior residual-based robust theory is used to detect
                                      the poor-quality UWB measurements based on Equation (13). Finally, the moving average
                    Remote Sens. 2024,filter  is further
                                       16, x FOR         applied to smooth the noise of these UWB range series without poor-quality
                                                  PEER REVIEW                                                                                   7 o
                                      ranges. Then, reliable and accurate UWB positioning solutions can be obtained.




                                                   Figure
                                  Figure 1. Algorithm     1. Algorithm
                                                       structure of the structure of thecalibration
                                                                        ranging offset   ranging oﬀset
                                                                                                    andcalibration and moving
                                                                                                        moving average          average filter enhan
                                                                                                                        filter enhanced
                                  the reliable UWBthe reliable UWB
                                                    positioning      positioning model.
                                                                model.

                                                   3. Experiments and Results
                                                        To validate the performance of the proposed method, four sets of UWB/INS (Ine
                                                   Navigation System) data collection experiments in diﬀerent environments were arran
                                                   on the campus of the China University of Geosciences Beijing by using the Link Tr
                                                   UWB sensors (Table 1) which is provided by the Nooploop comp
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                           7 of 18



                              3. Experiments and Results
                                    To validate the performance of the proposed method, four sets of UWB/INS (Inertial
                              Navigation System) data collection experiments in different environments were arranged on
                              the campus of the China University of Geosciences Beijing by using the Link Track UWB sen-
                              sors (Table 1) which is provided by the Nooploop company (https://www.nooploop.com,
                              accessed on 26 April 2024), including a dynamic test in an open outdoor environment
                              (Figure 2a), a dynamic test in an indoor–outdoor transition area (Figure 2b), a dynamic
                              test in a complex indoor environment (Figure 2c), and a static test in an outdoor open-sky
                              environment (Figure 2d). As is shown in Figure 2, the experiment environments and the
                              sketch maps of the exhibition of these four tests are presented. Here, the static experiment
                              was to verify the existence of a UWB ranging error, and the three dynamic tests were to
                              validate the effectiveness of the proposed methods on the UWB positioning performance in
                              terms of accuracy and smoothness. The dynamic test in an outdoor environment is mainly
                              to validate enhancements in the ranging offset calibration and the moving average filter
                              because no NLOS errors exist here. The dynamic tests in the indoor and indoor–outdoor
                              transition area environments are mainly to validate enhancements in the ranging offset
                              calibration and the prior residual-based robust algorithm. During each test, certain epochs
                              at the beginning or end were to collect the static UWB data that were used to calculate the
                              UWB ranging offsets.

                              Table 1. Typical specifications of Link Track UWB sensor.

                                                 Parameter                                       Value
                                              Antenna type                                  External antenna
                                         Maximum range coverage                                  <500 m
                                       Recommended range coverage                                <300 m
                                             Update rate (Hz)                                      20
                                               Delay (ms)                                         <50
                                           Ranging accuracy (m)                                    0.1
                                                                                              [3744, 4243]
                                      Optimal frequency band (MHz)
                                                                                              [4243, 4742]
                                              Ranging scheme                              TOA (Time-of-Arrive)


                              3.1. UWB Positioning Accuracy Evaluation Method
                                    During each test, nine UWB hardware were used, wherein eight of them were used
                              as base stations and marked as A0, A1, A2... A7. The left one was used as a user tag. The
                              distributions of these UWB hardware are shown in Figure 2. As is shown, due to the poor
                              observabilities in the indoor and indoor–outdoor transition area environments, it is impos-
                              sible to evaluate the UWB positioning accuracy through GNSS solutions. Meanwhile, since
                              the standard deviation obtained based on parameter estimation is an internal coincidence
                              accuracy index, it cannot reflect the actual positioning accuracy. Therefore, this paper uses
                              a total station to measure the 3D coordinates of the reference route with a distance interval
                              of 1 m. Then, the 3D coordinates of the route can be calculated by using linear interpolation.
                              Finally, we evaluate the UWB positioning accuracy by calculating the Euclidean distance
                              from the UWB tag to the measured reference route. The principle of such an accuracy
                              evaluation method of UWB positioning is illustrated in Figure 3. ‘Reference’ represents the
                              coordinates on the reference route, ‘Estimation’ represents the UWB positioning results,
                              and ‘Error’ represents the corresponding Euclidean distance. The position error can be
                              defined by                                             √
                                                          
                                                           x = | Ax0 + By0 + C |/ A2 + B2
                                                          
                                                              A = 1/( x1 − x2 )
                                                          
                                                                                                                        (16)
                                                           B = 1/(y2 − y1 )
                                                          
                                                             C = Ax1 − By1
                                                          
                                                    Here, the static experiment was to verify the existence of a UWB ranging error, and
                                                    three dynamic tests were to validate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed methods on
                                                    UWB positioning performance in terms of accuracy and smoothness. The dynamic te
                                                    an outdoor environment is mainly to validate enhancements in the ranging oﬀset cal
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                         tion and the moving average filter because no NLOS errors exist here. 8The         of 18dynamic
                                                    in the indoor and indoor–outdoor transition area environments are mainly to validate
                                                    hancements in the ranging oﬀset calibration and the prior residual-based robust a
                                    where x denotesrithm.   During
                                                      the UWB       each test,error,
                                                                positioning    certainandepochs
                                                                                          ( x1 , y1at the (beginning
                                                                                                   ) and    x2 , y2 ) areor end
                                                                                                                          the   were
                                                                                                                              two    to collect
                                                                                                                                  points on     the s
                                                    UWB    data that were used   to  calculate   the UWB
                                    the reference route closest to the UWB positioning result ( x , y ).    ranging     oﬀsets.
                                                                                                                    0         0

                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                     Base Station
                                                                                                                     Reference
                                                                                                 30


                                                                                                 25


                                                                                                 20                                       Penalty Area

                                                                                                                                                                                  Rubber
                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                             Football Pitch                                                       runway

                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                  5


                                                                                                  0


                     Remote Sens. 2024, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                    −5                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                        −15        −10        −5     0        5          10        15        20    25          30      35
                                                                                                                                                       x(m)


                                                                                     (a)

                                                                                                 −5                      Base Statin
                                                                                                                         Reference

                                                                                                 −10


                                                                                                 −15                 Building
                                                                                                                                                                                   Outdoor Road
                                                                                                 −20
                                                                                                                                                   Exit
                                                                                                 −25
                                                                                                               Prdestrians

                                                                                                 −30

                                                                                                                                    Outdoor Road
                                                                                                 −35

                                                                                                       −20         −15        −10       −5         0          5         10        15           20       25
                                                                                                                                                       x(m)


                                                                                     (b)
                                                                                                                                              Parking Area
                                                                                                 20



                                                                                                 15      Exit
                                                                                                                                                   Indoor road

                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                  Parking Area

                                                                                                                                                                                             Base Station
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                             Reference



                                                                                                  0                                                       Indoor road


                                                                                                 −5                                                    Parking Area
                                                                                                             −25         −20        −15        −10            −5        0          5            10
                                                                                                                                                       x(m)


                                                                                     (c)
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                        Runwany

                                                                                                                         Base Station
                                                                                                                         Reference
                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                 −5




                                                                                                 −10
                                                                                                               penalty area
                                                                                                                                                   Football pitch

                                                                                                 −15




                                                                                                       −10               −5               0               5             10              15             20
                                                                                                                                                       x(m)


                                                                                     (d)
                                                    Figure 2. UWB
                                    Figure 2. UWB experiments       experiments and
                                                                  environments    environments
                                                                                      the sketchand the of
                                                                                                 maps   sketch maps of the exhibitions.
                                                                                                           the exhibitions. (a) Outdoor(a) Outdoo
                                                    vironment. (b) Transition area. (c) Indoor environment. (d) UWB ranging oﬀset existence test.
                                    environment. (b) Transition area. (c) Indoor environment. (d) UWB ranging offset existence test.
                                                      Table 1. Typical specifications of Link Track UWB sensor.

                                                                            Parameter                                                                                             Value
                                                                           Antenna type                                                                                      External antenna
                                                                      Maximum range coverage                                                                                      <500 m
                                                                    Recommended range coverage                                                                                    <300 m
                                                                         Update rate (Hz)                                                                                            20
                                                                            Delay (ms)                                                                                              <50
                                                                                       C = Ax1 − By1
                              where 𝑥 denotes the UWB positioning error, and (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) a
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511   on the reference route closest to the UWB positioning
                                                                                9 of 18 resul




                                  18

                                  16

                                  14
                                                    17.5                                              Estimation
                                  12                                                                  Reference
                                                      17                                              Error
                                  10
                                                    16.5
                                   8
                                                      16
                                   6

                                   4                             2      3          4      5

                                   2

                                   0

                                 −2
                                  −25         −20          −15       −10           −5         0        5          10
                                                                            x(m)

                              Figure 3. UWB positioning accuracy evaluation method.
                              Figure 3. UWB positioning accuracy evaluation method.
                              3.2. UWB Ranging Data Quality Analysis
                                    The UWB ranging measurements of the eight base stations in an open outdoor dynamic
                              3.2. UWB Ranging Data Quality Analysis
                              test, indoor–outdoor transition area dynamic test, complex indoor dynamic test, and static
                              test are shown in Figure 4. Accordingly, it can be seen that the quality of the UWB
                                       The UWB ranging measurements of the eight base statio
                              measurements is highly dependent on the user environments. For example, visible poor-
                              quality measurements exist in indoor environments, and the quality of UWB ranges in
                               test, indoor–outdoor transition area dynamic test, complex ind
                              other environments is much higher. As is widely known, the quality of measurements is
                               are shown in Figure 4. Accordingly, it can be seen that the qua
                              the major factor that determines the final UWB positioning accuracy. Meanwhile, the UWB
                              ranging offsets of these four tests calculated based on Equation (9) are plotted in Figure 5
                               is highly dependent on the user environments. For example
                              and the corresponding statistics are listed in Figure 6. Significantly, it can be found that the
                              calculated UWB ranging errors do not satisfy the unbiasedness of Gaussian distribution
                               ments exist in indoor environments, and the quality of UWB
                              with a mean of nonzero, which proves the existence of ranging offsets. What is more, it can
                              be seen that such ranging offsets are different for different base–tag pairs. According to
                               much higher. As is widely known, the quality of measuremen
                              the calculated RMS values, the ranging offset could be centimeters to decimeters, and the
                               mines the final UWB positioning accuracy. Meanwhile, the UW
                              values for the same base–tag pair could also be different in different tests. Such differences
                              are visible in most of the base–tag pairs. Therefore, such ranging offsets should be calibrated
                               tests calculated based on Equation (9) are plotted in Figure 5 a
                              before UWB ranges are used in positioning.
                               areUWB
                              3.3.  listed     in Figure
                                        Positioning          6. Significantly, it can be found that the cal
                                                    Accuracy Analysis
                               notTosatisfy      the unbiasedness
                                      further evaluate                      of Gaussian
                                                        the impacts of each presented algorithmdistribution
                                                                                                 on UWB positioningwith a m
                              accuracy, these collected UWB dynamic data are processed by conventional EKF, prior
                               the existence
                              residual-based  robust of  ranging offsets.
                                                     theory-augmented            What
                                                                       EKF (R.EKF),       isoffset
                                                                                    ranging  more,       it can be seen t
                                                                                                   calibrated-enhanced
                              EKF (O.EKF), prior residual-based robust theory and ranging offset calibration-enhanced
                               ferent for different base–tag pairs. According to the calculated
                              (RO.EKF), and moving average filter-enhanced RS.EKF (ROA.EKF), respectively. The
                              corresponding results are displayed in Figure 7.
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                                              10 of 18
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                                               10 of 18



                                                        could
                                                         could be
                                                                be centimeters
                                                                    centimeters toto decimeters,
                                                                                     decimeters, and
                                                                                                  and the
                                                                                                       the values
                                                                                                           values for
                                                                                                                   for the
                                                                                                                        the same
                                                                                                                             same base–tag
                                                                                                                                   base–tag pair
                                                                                                                                            pair could
                                                                                                                                                  could also
                                                                                                                                                        also be
                                                                                                                                                              be
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                             different in  different tests. Such differences are visible in most   of the base–tag pairs. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                         10 of 18
                                                         different in different tests. Such differences are visible in most of the base–tag pairs. Therefore,
                                                        such
                                                         suchranging
                                                               rangingoffsets
                                                                         offsetsshould
                                                                                 shouldbebecalibrated
                                                                                            calibratedbefore
                                                                                                       beforeUWB
                                                                                                               UWBranges
                                                                                                                     rangesare areused
                                                                                                                                   usedin
                                                                                                                                        inpositioning.
                                                                                                                                           positioning.

                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                  40
            Value(m)




                                                                                                                      Value(m)
                                                                                                                                 30
    RangingValue(m)




                                                                                                              RangingValue(m)
                                                                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                             Ranging
   Ranging




                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                   00    1000    2000      3000     4000     5000         6000
                                                                                                                                     0    1000    2000      3000     4000     5000         6000
                                                                                                                                                          Epoch
                                                                                                                                                          Epoch
                                                       (a)
                                                        (a)                                                                                              (b)
                                                                                                                                                          (b)
                       40                                                                                                      40
                        40                                                                                                      40                         A0       A2       A4          A6
                                                                                                                                                           A0       A2       A4          A6
                                                                                                                                                           A1       A3       A5          A7
                                                                                                                                                           A1       A3       A5          A7
            Value(m)




                                                                                                                      Value(m)
                       30                                                                                                      30
    RangingValue(m)




                                                                                                              RangingValue(m)
                        30                                                                                                      30

                       20                                                                                                      20
                        20                                                                                                      20
   Ranging




                                                                                                             Ranging
                       10                                                                                                      10
                        10                                                                                                      10

                        0                                                                                                        0
                         00    1000       2000          3000        4000           5000           6229                            00     1000    2000       3000     4000     5000        5824
                           0    1000       2000          3000        4000           5000           6229                             0     1000    2000       3000     4000     5000        5824
                                                        Epoch                                                                                             Epoch
                                                        Epoch                                                                                             Epoch
                                                       (c)
                                                        (c)                                                                                              (d)
                                                                                                                                                          (d)
                                                        Figure
                                                         Figure 4.4. UWB
                                                                      UWB   ranging values  of each  base––tag
                                                                                                            tag pair
                                                                                                                pair in
                                                                                                                      in diﬀerent tests. (a) UWB ranges in the static
                                                                      UWB ranging
                                                                             ranging values
                                                                                      values of
                                                                                             of each
                                                                                                each base
                                                                                                      base–tag           diﬀerent
                                                                                                                         different tests. (a) UWB ranges in the static
                                                        test. (b)
                                                         test. (b) UWB    ranges  in the outdoor  environments.    (c) UWB    ranges  in the transition area. (d) UWB
                                                               (b) UWB
                                                                   UWB ranges
                                                                           ranges in the outdoor environments. (c) UWB ranges in the transition area. (d) UWB
                                                        ranges
                                                         ranges  in  the indoor  environments.
                                                         ranges inin the
                                                                      the indoor
                                                                          indoor environments.
                                                                                  environments.

                       0.6
                        0.6
         Offset(m)




                                                                                                                   Offset(m)




                       0.4
 RangingOffset(m)




                                                                                                           RangingOffset(m)




                        0.4

                       0.2
                        0.2
                                                                                                          Ranging
Ranging




                         0
                          0

                     −0.2
                      −0.20    300       600       900          1200       1500       1800        2095
                           0    300       600       900          1200       1500       1800        2095
                                                        Epoch
                                                        Epoch
                                                       (a)
                                                        (a)                                                                                              (b)
                                                                                                                                                          (b)
                       0.6
                        0.6
         Offset(m)




                                                                                                                   Offset(m)




                       0.4
 RangingOffset(m)




                                                                                                           RangingOffset(m)




                        0.4

                       0.2
                        0.2
Ranging




                                                                                                          Ranging




                         0
                          0

                     −0.2
                      −0.20    50      100      150       200       250       300          350     400
                           0    50      100      150       200       250       300          350     400
                                                        Epoch
                                                        Epoch
                                                       (c)
                                                        (c)                                                                                              (d)
                                                                                                                                                          (d)

                                                         Figure 5. Ranging offset time series in different conditions. (a) Ranging offsets in the static test.
                                                         (b) Ranging offsets in the outdoor environments. (c) Ranging offsets in the transition area. (d) Ranging
                                                         offsets in the indoor environments.
 Remote Sens. 2024, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                                                                                                 11 of 18




Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                          Figure 5. Ranging oﬀset time series in diﬀerent conditions. (a) Ranging oﬀsets in the static test. (b)
                                                                                                                                                  11 of 18
                                                     Ranging oﬀsets in the outdoor environments. (c) Ranging oﬀsets in the transition area. (d) Ranging
                                                     oﬀsets in the indoor environments.




                                                Figure 6. Statistical results of ranging oﬀsets in the four experiments.

                                                3.3. UWB Positioning Accuracy Analysis
                                                     To further evaluate the impacts of each presented algorithm on UWB positioning ac-
                                                curacy, these collected UWB dynamic data are processed by conventional EKF, prior re-
                                                sidual-based robust theory-augmented EKF (R.EKF), ranging oﬀset calibrated-enhanced
                                                EKF (O.EKF), prior residual-based robust theory and ranging oﬀset calibration-enhanced
                                                (RO.EKF),    and moving
                                                  Figure6.6.Statistical
                                                             Statistical     average
                                                                         results        filter-enhanced      RS.EKF  (ROA.EKF), respectively. The cor-
                                                 Figure                 results ofofranging
                                                                                     ranging  oﬀsetsininthe
                                                                                             offsets     thefour
                                                                                                             fourexperiments.
                                                                                                                  experiments.
                                                responding results are displayed in Figure 7.
                                                  3.3. UWB Positioning Accuracy Analysis
    16                                                                       −5                                                                                20

    14
                                                         To further evaluate the impacts of each presented algorithm on UWB positioning ac-
    12                                               curacy, these collected UWB dynamic data are processed by conventional EKF, prior re-
                                                                            −10
                                                                                                                                                               15

    10                                               sidual-based robust theory-augmented EKF (R.EKF), ranging oﬀset calibrated-enhanced
                                                                            −15
     8
                                                     EKF (O.EKF), prior residual-based robust theory and ranging oﬀset calibration-enhanced                    10                                                                      Base Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Reference
     6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EKF
                                                                            −20

     4
                                                     (RO.EKF), and moving average filter-enhanced RS.EKF (ROA.EKF), respectively. The cor-                                                                                             O.EKF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R.EKF
                                                                                                                                                                5                                                                      RO.EKF

     2
                                                     responding results are displayed in Figure 7.
                                                                            −25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ROA.EKF



     0                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                            −30
    −2   16                                                                       −5                                                                                20

         14
              0       5              10        15              20             −2−10             −1        0         1            2         3           4                   −20         −15         −10           −5        0       5             10
         12                   x(m)                                                                                 x(m)                                             15                                    x(m)

         10
                          (a)                                                     −15                             (b)                                                                                (c)
          8                                                                                                                                                         10                                                                       Base Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reference
          6                                     Figure
                                                 Figure7.7.Trajectories
                                                            Trajectoriescalculated
                                                                          calculatedbybydiﬀerent
                                                                                  −20             schemes
                                                                                          different       in in
                                                                                                    schemes   thethe
                                                                                                                   three diﬀerent
                                                                                                                      three        tests.
                                                                                                                            different     (a)(a)
                                                                                                                                      tests.  Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                 Outdoortest.
                                                                                                                                                          test.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EKF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O.EKF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R.EKF
          4
                                                (b) Transition   area   test. (c) Indoor  test.
                                                 (b) Transition area test. (c) Indoor test.
                                                                                                                    5                                                                                                                        RO.EKF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROA.EKF
                                                                                  −25
          2

          0
                                   3.3.1.UWB
                                  3.3.1.   UWBRanging
                                                   RangingOﬀset
                                                              OffsetCalibration
                                                                       CalibrationAlgorithm
                                                                                  −30 AlgorithmEnhanced
                                                                                                      EnhancedUWB  UWBPositioning
                                                                                                                          Positioning                                0

         −2


                  0       5
                                          Firstly,the
                                        Firstly,
                                          10
                                                    theimpact
                                                    15
                                                         impactof ofthe
                                                                    20
                                                                      the UWBUWBranging
                                                                                    rangingoﬀset
                                                                                    −2
                                                                                               offseton
                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                        onthe
                                                                                                            theUWB
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                 UWBpositioning
                                                                                                                        positioningaccuracy
                                                                                                                           1         2
                                                                                                                                          accuracyisis
                                                                                                                                                3          4                     −20         −15         −10          −5       0         5             10
                           x(m)
                                   analyzed.      Figures   8–10  show      the time   series  of  the  position   errors
                                  analyzed. Figures 8–10 show the time series of the position errors in the horizontal and in
                                                                                                                          x(m)
                                                                                                                               the
                                                                                                                               x(m)
                                                                                                                                     horizontal    and
                         (a)       vertical    directions   of the  three (b)dynamic     tests,  which    are calculated
                                  vertical directions of the three dynamic tests, which are calculated by the EKF with and by(c)the   EKF   with   and
                                   without
                                  without    7.the
                                    Figure the      ranging
                                                  ranging
                                                 Trajectories  offset
                                                            offset     calibration.
                                                                   calibration.
                                                              calculated               Asschemes
                                                                                            mentioned
                                                                                   As mentioned
                                                                            by diﬀerent                theabove,
                                                                                                    inabove,        the UWB
                                                                                                              thediﬀerent
                                                                                                            three  UWB   ranging ranging
                                                                                                                            tests.          offsets
                                                                                                                                      offsets
                                                                                                                                    (a)       in each
                                                                                                                                        Outdoor      in
                                                                                                                                                    test.
                                   each
                                  test aretest  are calculated
                                            calculated    by     by
                                                              using  using
                                                                      the     the
                                                                            static
                                    (b) Transition area test. (c) Indoor test.    static
                                                                                   data   data
                                                                                          that  that
                                                                                               are    are collected
                                                                                                    collected   at   at
                                                                                                                   the  the beginning
                                                                                                                        beginning      or  or
                                                                                                                                          the  the
                                                                                                                                               end end
                                                                                                                                                    of
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                   of each                                                                                                      12 of 18
                                  each   test.test. Significantly,
                                                Significantly,  afterafter
                                                                        the the  compensation
                                                                             compensation           of ranging
                                                                                                of ranging        offsets,
                                                                                                              offsets, the the   position
                                                                                                                            position        accuracy
                                                                                                                                         accuracy   in
                                   in different
                                  different
                                    3.3.1. UWB     environments
                                               environments          in  both   the
                                                                in bothCalibration
                                                    Ranging Oﬀset                   horizontal
                                                                           the horizontal          and
                                                                                             and vertical
                                                                                        Algorithm        vertical  components
                                                                                                             components
                                                                                                       Enhanced                     is improved.
                                                                                                                            is improved.
                                                                                                                    UWB Positioning
                                                           Firstly, the impact of the UWB ranging oﬀset on the UWB positioning accuracy is
                                                     analyzed. Figures 8–10 show the time series of the position errors in the horizontal and
                                                     vertical directions of the three dynamic tests, which are calculated by the EKF with and
                                                     without the ranging offset calibration. As mentioned above, the UWB ranging offsets in each
                                                     test are calculated by using the static data that are collected at the beginning or the end of
                                                     each test. Significantly, after the compensation of ranging offsets, the position accuracy in
                                                     different environments in both the horizontal and vertical components is improved.

                                                    Figure 8.
                                                    Figure 8. Time
                                                               Time series
                                                                    series of
                                                                           of position
                                                                              position errors
                                                                                       errors using
                                                                                              using EKF
                                                                                                    EKF with
                                                                                                        with and
                                                                                                             and without
                                                                                                                 without ranging
                                                                                                                         ranging offset
                                                                                                                                 oﬀset calibration
                                                                                                                                        calibration in
                                                                                                                                                     in the
                                                                                                                                                        the
                                                    outdoor environment.
                                                    outdoor   environment.

                                                                   EKF RMS=0.072                                                         EKF           O.EKF                                                      O.EKF RMS=0.083
                                                         0.2

                                                         0.1

                                                          0
                                                          1 EKF RMS=0.566                                                                                                                                             EKF RMS=0.291

                                                         0.5

                                                          0
                                                               0                         1000                     2000                     3000                     4000                           5000                                6229
                                                                                                                                               Epoch
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                                       12 of 18
                              Figure 8. Time series of position errors using EKF with and without ranging oﬀset calibration in the
                              Figure 8. Time series of position errors using EKF with and without ranging oﬀset calibration in the
                              outdoor environment.
                              outdoor environment.
                                                              EKF RMS=0.072                 EKF           O.EKF                 O.EKF RMS=0.083
                                                         0.2
                                                              EKF RMS=0.072                 EKF           O.EKF                 O.EKF RMS=0.083
                                                         0.2
                                                         0.1
                                                         0.1
                                                            0
                                                           01 EKF RMS=0.566                                                      EKF RMS=0.291
                                                           1 EKF RMS=0.566                                                       EKF RMS=0.291
                                                         0.5
                                                         0.5
                                                           0
                                                           00                 1000   2000     3000                4000   5000                6229
                                                             0                1000   2000     3000
                                                                                                Epoch             4000   5000                6229
                                                                                                  Epoch
                              Figure 9.
                              Figure  9. Time
                                         Time series
                                                series of
                                                       of position
                                                          position errors
                                                                   errors using
                                                                          using EKF
                                                                                EKF with
                                                                                    with and
                                                                                         and without
                                                                                             without ranging
                                                                                                     ranging offset
                                                                                                             oﬀset calibration
                                                                                                                    calibration in
                                                                                                                                in the
                                                                                                                                   the
                              Figure 9. Time series of position errors using EKF with and without ranging oﬀset calibration in the
                              transition
                              transition  area.
                              transition area.
                                          area.
                                V Error(m)H H
                              V Error(m)      Error(m)
                                            Error(m)




                              Figure 10. Time series of position errors using EKF with and without ranging oﬀset calibration in
                              Figure 10.
                                     10. Timeseries
                                              seriesofofposition
                                                         positionerrors
                                                                  errorsusing
                                                                         using EKF with  and without  ranging oﬀset   calibration in
                              the indoorTime
                              Figure     environment.                         EKF with and without ranging offset calibration in the
                              the indoor environment.
                              indoor environment.
                                    According to the statistical results, the position error in terms of the RMS in the hor-
                                    According to   to the
                                                       thestatistical
                                                             statisticalresults,
                                                                             results,thetheposition
                                                                                              position error  in terms
                                                                                                          error  in terms of the
                                                                                                                              of RMS
                                                                                                                                  the RMS  in theinhor-
                                                                                                                                                     the
                              izontal and vertical components for the indoor environment experiment is improved from
                              izontal andand
                              horizontal    vertical    components
                                                  vertical   components    for the
                                                                                 forindoor
                                                                                     the indoorenvironment
                                                                                                     environmentexperiment      is improved
                                                                                                                       experiment       is improvedfrom
                              0.238 m and 0.795 m to 0.176 m and 0.373 m, respectively, with the corresponding im-
                              0.238 0.238
                              from   m and  m0.795     m to m
                                                and 0.795       0.176    m and
                                                                    to 0.176    m 0.373
                                                                                   and 0.373m, respectively,     withwith
                                                                                                  m, respectively,       the corresponding
                                                                                                                              the corresponding      im-
                              provement percentages of 26.1% and 53.1%. For the outdoor environment experiment,
                              provement percentages
                              improvement       percentages    of of 26.1%
                                                                       26.1%and and53.1%.
                                                                                     53.1%.For   Forthe
                                                                                                     theoutdoor
                                                                                                          outdoor environment
                                                                                                                     environment experiment,
                                                                                                                                         experiment,
                              such position RMSs in the two directions are 0.089 m and 0.458 m, which brings 33.1%
                                    position RMSs
                              such position     RMSsininthe  thetwo  twodirections
                                                                           directions  areare   0.089
                                                                                            0.089      m and
                                                                                                    m and       0.458
                                                                                                             0.458       m, which
                                                                                                                   m, which      bringsbrings
                                                                                                                                            33.1% 33.1%
                                                                                                                                                    and
                              and 19.5% enhancements compared to the solutions (0.133 m and 0.569 m) of the EKF
                              19.5%  enhancements
                              and 19.5%     enhancements  compared        to the to
                                                                   compared        solutions     (0.133 m
                                                                                      the solutions         and m
                                                                                                         (0.133   0.569
                                                                                                                     andm)0.569
                                                                                                                              of them)EKF      without
                                                                                                                                          of the    EKF
                              without ranging oﬀset calibration. For the transitional area experiment, there are visible
                              ranging
                              without offset
                                        ranging  calibration.      For the transitional
                                                    oﬀset calibration.                          area experiment,
                                                                               For the transitional                  there arethere
                                                                                                          area experiment,         visible areposition
                                                                                                                                                 visible
                              position   improvements
                              improvements
                                                               in
                                                 in the vertical
                                                                    the  vertical   direction     (vertical   RMS   is  improved      from     0.566 m
                              position improvements           in thedirection
                                                                         vertical (vertical
                                                                                    directionRMS      is improved
                                                                                                  (vertical  RMS isfrom      0.566 m
                                                                                                                       improved       fromto 0.291
                                                                                                                                               0.566m),
                                                                                                                                                      m
                              to 0.291 m), which
                              which                     results    in about     a 48.6%     position accuracy upgradation            in the     vertical
                              to 0.291results   in about
                                        m), which      resultsa 48.6%
                                                                   in aboutposition
                                                                                a 48.6% accuracy
                                                                                           positionupgradation        in the vertical
                                                                                                       accuracy upgradation          in the  direction.
                                                                                                                                               vertical
                              direction. However,
                              However,                    there is no     accuracy enhancement             in the horizontal The  component.         The
                              direction. there    is no there
                                           However,      accuracy is no enhancement        in the horizontal
                                                                          accuracy enhancement            in thecomponent.
                                                                                                                   horizontal component.main reason The
                              main
                              for    reason
                                  such        for  such
                                        an appearance      an   appearance       is that   there   are NLOS     errors   in the  transitional      area.
                              main  reason    for such an is       that there is
                                                               appearance        are  NLOS
                                                                                    that  thereerrors    in theerrors
                                                                                                   are NLOS      transitional     area. In general,
                                                                                                                         in the transitional       area.
                              In general,toaccording
                              according        these       to these
                                                        results     basedresults
                                                                             on    based
                                                                                  the  threeontests
                                                                                                 the three   tests in
                                                                                                       arranged    arranged
                                                                                                                       different in environments,
                                                                                                                                    diﬀerent envi-
                              In general, according to these results based on the three tests arranged in diﬀerent envi-
                              ronments,
                              we  can know  we can know          that the existence        of the UWB       ranging    oﬀset   will actually       limit
                              ronments,    we that     the existence
                                                can know        that theof      the UWB
                                                                             existence     of ranging
                                                                                               the UWBoffset     will oﬀset
                                                                                                            ranging     actually
                                                                                                                               willlimit     the UWB
                                                                                                                                      actually     limit
                              the UWB positioning
                              positioning   accuracy, and   accuracy,
                                                                  such an  and    such an accuracyislimitation
                                                                              accuracy                                  is much     more      visible  in
                              the UWB positioning          accuracy,       and   such anlimitation          much more
                                                                                             accuracy limitation           visiblemore
                                                                                                                       is much       in the    vertical
                                                                                                                                             visible  in
                              the  vertical
                              direction      direction
                                          rather   than in rather     than
                                                              the horizontal  in the   horizontal     components.       After  calibrating       such   a
                              the vertical   direction     rather     than in thecomponents.           After calibrating
                                                                                      horizontal components.           Aftersuch     a rangesuch
                                                                                                                               calibrating        offset,
                                                                                                                                                        a
                              range
                              the     oﬀset,
                                  corrected   the
                                               rangecorrected
                                                        can lead   range    can
                                                                      to a can
                                                                            higherlead  to  a
                                                                                     accuracy higher    accuracy
                                                                                                   parameter        parameter
                                                                                                                estimation.        estimation.
                              range  oﬀset, the    corrected       range         lead   to a higher     accuracy   parameter estimation.
                              3.3.2. Prior Residual-Based Robust
                              3.3.2.                          Robust Theory
                                                                       Theory Enhanced
                                                                               Enhanced UWBUWB Positioning
                                                                                                 Positioning
                              3.3.2. Prior Residual-Based Robust Theory Enhanced UWB Positioning
                                    According to
                                    According   to the
                                                   the data
                                                        data quality
                                                              quality analysis
                                                                       analysis results,
                                                                                 results, we
                                                                                          we know that there
                                                                                                          there are
                                                                                                                 are poor-quality
                                                                                                                     poor-quality
                                    According to the data quality analysis results, we know that there are poor-quality
                              measurements. This
                              measurements.    This means
                                                      means that
                                                              that the
                                                                   the UWB
                                                                        UWB positioning
                                                                              positioning accuracy
                                                                                           accuracy is
                                                                                                    is still
                                                                                                       still polluted
                                                                                                             polluted even
                                                                                                                       even when
                                                                                                                            when
                              measurements. This means that the UWB positioning accuracy is still polluted even when
                              applying   the ranging   offset calibration.
                              applying the ranging oﬀset calibration.       Therefore,  we  further presented    the impacts of aa
                              applying the ranging oﬀset calibration. Therefore, we further presented the impacts of a
                              robust
                              robust algorithm
                                      algorithm on
                                                 on the
                                                     the UWB
                                                         UWB positioning
                                                                positioning accuracy.
                                                                              accuracy. As
                                                                                         As mentioned
                                                                                            mentioned above,
                                                                                                        above, the conventional
                                                                                                                     conventional
                              robust algorithm on the UWB positioning accuracy. As mentioned above, the conventional
                              robust  theory based
                              robust theory   basedon onposterior
                                                          posterior   UWB
                                                                    UWB      ranging
                                                                          ranging      residuals
                                                                                    residuals    would
                                                                                              would       be polluted
                                                                                                     be polluted        by aUWB
                                                                                                                   by a bad  bad
                              robust theory based on posterior UWB ranging residuals would be polluted by a bad UWB
                              UWB measurement at the previous epoch. Therefore, the prior residual-based robust
                              algorithm is adopted here. In contrast, the prior residual-based robust theory-augmented
                              EKF (R.EKF) as well as the prior residual-based robust theory and ranging offset calibration
                              algorithm-enhanced EKF (RO.EKF) schemes are used. However, it should be noted that the
                              performance of a robust model could be ineffective even with a slight accuracy degradation
                              while the observation quality is high. In this study, the observation quality for the indoor
                              test was poor, while the observation qualities for the transition and outdoor routes were
                              higher. The time series of the position errors and the corresponding statistics are shown in
                              Figure 11.
                                    and vertical directions) and with those of RO.EKF (0.089 m and 0.279 m in horizontal
                                    and vertical directions). The eﬀect is rather clear in Figure 11c. However, in the transi-
                                    tion area and outdoor conditions where there are high-quality observations, there are no
                                    significant improvements even in accuracy degradation. In fact, besides 2.4% position ac-
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511         curacy improvements in the vertical direction in the transition area, there are no13more
                                                                                                                        of 18
                                    position accuracy improvements in such two environments.




                                    V Error(m) H Error(m)
                                    V Error(m) H Error(m)
                                    V Error(m) H Error(m)




                                    Figure 11.
                                    Figure 11. Time
                                               Time series
                                                      series of
                                                             ofposition
                                                                position errors
                                                                          errorsusing
                                                                                usingEKF
                                                                                       EKFwith
                                                                                            withand
                                                                                                 andwithout
                                                                                                    withoutranging
                                                                                                            rangingoffset
                                                                                                                    oﬀsetcalibration
                                                                                                                          calibration in
                                                                                                                                       in
                                    outdoor(a),
                                    outdoor  (a),transition
                                                  transitionarea
                                                             area(b),
                                                                  (b),and
                                                                       andindoor
                                                                           indoor(c)
                                                                                  (c)environments.
                                                                                      environments.

                                   TableObviously,
                                         2. RMS values   of diﬀerent
                                                     it can be seen positioning  methods
                                                                     that the prior        in the three robust
                                                                                     residual-based     diﬀerenttheory
                                                                                                                  environments.
                                                                                                                        performs more
                                 visibly with existing poor-quality observations like in indoor environments. According
                                   Indoor                                 Transition                               Outdoor
     RMS (m)                      to the statistical RMS values in Table 2, the position accuracy improvement percentages
                         Horizontal
                                  in the horizontal and vertical directions are 49.4% and 25.2% compared to Vertical
                                             Vertical          Horizontal            Vertical         Horizontal          the position
       EKF                 0.238 errors with0.795
                                               the ranging offset calibration-enhanced UWB (0.176 m and 0.373 m in0.569
                                                                  0.072                0.566              0.133              horizontal
      O.EKF                0.176 and vertical 0.373
                                                directions) and 0.083
                                                                  with those of RO.EKF 0.291(0.089 m and  0.089             0.458 and
                                                                                                            0.279 m in horizontal
     RO.EKF                0.089 vertical directions).
                                              0.279               0.098
                                                         The effect  is rather clear in0.284              0.092 in the transition
                                                                                        Figure 11c. However,                0.455 area
                                  and outdoor conditions where there are high-quality observations, there are no significant
                                  improvements even in accuracy degradation. In fact, besides 2.4% position accuracy
                                  improvements in the vertical direction in the transition area, there are no more position
                                  accuracy improvements in such two environments.

                                   Table 2. RMS values of different positioning methods in the three different environments.

                                                                                Indoor                 Transition                  Outdoor
                                                            RMS (m)
                                                                      Horizontal     Vertical    Horizontal   Vertical   Horizontal     Vertical
                                                             EKF        0.238            0.795     0.072        0.566      0.133             0.569
                                                            O.EKF       0.176            0.373     0.083        0.291      0.089             0.458
                                                            RO.EKF      0.089            0.279     0.098        0.284      0.092             0.455


                                    3.3.3. Moving Average Filter Enhanced UWB Positioning
                                         After applying the ranging offset calibration and the prior residual-based robust
                                   algorithm, UWB can theoretically provide high-precision indoor positioning solutions.
                                   However, due to the influence of observation noise, the positioning results would be noised.
                                   To make the solutions smoother, a moving average filter is introduced to denoise the
                                   positioning results obtained from the above sections.
                                         Before applying the moving average filter for denoising, it is necessary to set the
                                   window size. Shown in Figure 12 are the trajectories calculated by setting the window sizes
                                   to 5, 10, 15, and 20 epochs based on the data from the indoor test, and the corresponding
                               noised. To
                               gorithm,      make
                                           UWB      can thetheoretically
                                                             solutions smoother,          a moving average
                                                                            provide high-precision             indoor  filter  is introduced
                                                                                                                           positioning              to d
                                                                                                                                             solutions
                               the  positioning      results     obtained    from    the   above     sections.
                               However, due to the influence of observation noise, the positioning results would be
                                     Before
                               noised.        applying
                                        To make               the moving
                                                      the solutions           average
                                                                       smoother,           filter for
                                                                                      a moving          denoising,
                                                                                                     average    filter isit introduced
                                                                                                                            is necessary    toto set th
                                                                                                                                                denoise
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511    dowpositioning
                               the    size. Shown        in Figure
                                                   results    obtained12from
                                                                          are thethe trajectories
                                                                                      above sections.  calculated by setting14the        of 18
                                                                                                                                               window
                               to 5, Before
                                     10, 15,applying
                                              and 20 epochs          based
                                                            the moving        on thefilter
                                                                           average      datafor from    the indoor
                                                                                                   denoising,             test, andtothe
                                                                                                                  it is necessary        setcorrespo
                                                                                                                                               the win
                               dow
                               positioning errors are plotted in Figure 13. According to the results based onsize
                                     size.  Shown      in  Figure   12 are   the  trajectories     calculated     by   setting    the  window         di
                               to 5, 10, 15,
                              positioning
                               window        and 20
                                            errors
                                           sizes,   itareepochs
                                                          plotted
                                                        can        based  on
                                                                    in Figure
                                                              be known         the
                                                                            that    data
                                                                                13.the      from the
                                                                                    According
                                                                                         smoothness     indoor
                                                                                                    to the  results
                                                                                                           is      test,
                                                                                                               highly     and
                                                                                                                      based    onthe  corresponding
                                                                                                                                   different
                                                                                                                           dependent        on the w
                              window    sizes,errors
                                               it can be areknown
                               positioning
                               size. It demonstrates          that  athat
                                                              plotted   inthe
                                                                      small    smoothness
                                                                            Figure
                                                                               window          is highly to
                                                                                      13. According
                                                                                             size   would  dependent
                                                                                                               the take
                                                                                                              not          on the
                                                                                                                     results        window
                                                                                                                                 based
                                                                                                                             eﬀect   onon     diﬀeren
                                                                                                                                          denoising
                              size. It
                               window  demonstrates
                                          sizes, itsize  that
                                                      canwould a small
                                                            be known   window
                                                                         thatthe  size  would
                                                                               theobservations
                                                                                    smoothness isnot  take  effect  on   denoising,    and   a
                               large window                          make                              athighly     dependent
                                                                                                          the current
                              large window size would make the observations at the current epoch heavily influenced
                                                                                                                              epoch  onheavily
                                                                                                                                        the window influ
                               size. It demonstrates
                               byobservations
                                   observations             that
                                                       at previousa small   window
                                                                       epochs.     Basedsize   would    not   take    eﬀect    on  denoising,     and sea
                              by                 at previous     epochs.  Based on    theseon     thesethis
                                                                                              results,    results,     this study
                                                                                                             study ultimately          ultimately
                                                                                                                                    selects  a
                               large window size would make the observations at the current epoch heavily influenced
                               window
                              window       size
                                        size of 5ofepochs
                                                      5 epochs     for
                                                             for the   the moving
                                                                     moving    average average        filter to
                                                                                          filter to denoise   thedenoise
                                                                                                                    UWB data.   the UWB data.
                               by observations at previous epochs. Based on these results, this study ultimately selects a
                               window size of 5 epochs for the moving average filter to denoise the UWB data.
                              y(m) y(m)




                              Figure 12.  Trajectories    calculated   by setting   diﬀerent  window sizes.
                              Figure 12.Trajectories
                              Figure12.  Trajectoriescalculated by setting
                                                        calculated         different
                                                                    by setting       window
                                                                                diﬀerent    sizes.
                                                                                          window   sizes.




                              Figure 13.Time
                              Figure13.  Timeseries of position
                                               series           errors
                                                       of position     with with
                                                                    errors  setting different
                                                                                  setting     window
                                                                                          diﬀerent   sizes. sizes.
                                                                                                   window
                              Figure 13. Time series of position errors with setting diﬀerent window sizes.
                                    From the results shown in Figure 14, it can be known that there were almost no
                                     From the results shown in Figure 14, it can be known that there were almost no im
                                     From the
                              improvements          results
                                                in the        shown
                                                        positioning     in Figure
                                                                      RMS             14, it
                                                                            values, with     cana slight
                                                                                           even    be known
                                                                                                          accuracythat   there
                                                                                                                      loss.         were almost
                                                                                                                             Specifically,
                               provements
                              when
                                               in  the
                                     the observations
                                                         positioning    RMS    values,   with  even   a  slight  accuracy      loss.   Specifically
                               provements        in the are   without visible
                                                           positioning     RMSinfluences
                                                                                  values, by   NLOS
                                                                                             with   evenor multipath    errors (i.e., loss.
                                                                                                            a slight accuracy           the Speci
                               when
                              data     thethe
                                    from    observations
                                               outdoor        arethe
                                                           test),   without   visible
                                                                      positioning    RMSinfluences
                                                                                           value  is  by NLOS
                                                                                                     slightly       or multipath
                                                                                                               improved      because     errors
                                                                                                                                          of     (i.e.
                               when the observations are without visible influences by NLOS or multipath                                        erro
                               the data   from    the   outdoor    test), the positioning     RMS    value   is  slightly
                              the denoising operation in Equation (14) to the UWB range’s random noise. However, the         improved        because
                               thethe
                               of   data
                              positioning
                                           from
                                       denoising   the
                                            accuracy
                                                          outdoorintest),
                                                     operation
                                                        could be lost
                                                                             the positioning
                                                                      Equation     (14) to the UWB
                                                                       while the observations
                                                                                                   RMSrange’s
                                                                                                           value
                                                                                                 are polluted
                                                                                                                    is as
                                                                                                                       slightly
                                                                                                                   random
                                                                                                                such            noise.
                                                                                                                           in the
                                                                                                                                      improved
                                                                                                                                    indoor However  b
                               of the
                              and
                               the      denoising
                                   transition
                                   positioning  areas, operation
                                                        which can
                                                    accuracy         in identified
                                                                     be
                                                                 could    Equation
                                                                         be          by(14)
                                                                            lost while      toobservations
                                                                                        making
                                                                                          the   the  UWB range’s
                                                                                                  a comparison  arewith   random
                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                      polluted results  noise.
                                                                                                                                     such inas inHo
                                                                                                                                                  the
                               the
                              Figurepositioning
                                      14 and   the    accuracy
                                                     data          could
                                                           qualities in     be
                                                                        Figure  lost
                                                                                 4. Inwhile   the
                                                                                       general,     observations
                                                                                                 such   a moving
                               indoor and transition areas, which can be identified by making a comparison with        are
                                                                                                                    average  polluted
                                                                                                                                filter can   such the
                                                                                                                                                   as
                              theoretically
                               indoorinand
                               results       make     the
                                                transition
                                           Figure         positioning
                                                      14 and areas,
                                                               the data solutions
                                                                        which       smoother,
                                                                                  caninbeFigure
                                                                           qualities           but  such
                                                                                            identified    an  effect
                                                                                                           by making
                                                                                                   4. In general,     could   be   limited
                                                                                                                      such aa comparison
                                                                                                                                 moving average    w
                              while  the measurements        suffer NLOS    and/or   multipath   errors.
                               results in Figure 14 and the data qualities in Figure 4. In general, such a moving a
                              filter can theoretically make the positioning solutions smoother, but such an eﬀect could
                              filter
                              be     can theoretically
                                  limited               make the positioning
                                          while the measurements   suﬀer NLOSsolutions   smoother,
                                                                                and/or multipath     but such an eﬀect
                                                                                                 errors.
                              be limited while the measurements suﬀer NLOS and/or multipath errors.
Remote Sens.
Remote Sens.2024,
             2024,16,
                  16,2511
                      x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                 15 of 18
                                                                                                                                                    of 18




                                 V Error(m) H Error(m)
                                 V Error(m) H Error(m)
                                 V Error(m) H Error(m)




                                Figure 14.
                                Figure    14. Time
                                              Time series
                                                   series of
                                                          of position
                                                             position errors
                                                                       errors of
                                                                              of the
                                                                                  the three
                                                                                       three dynamic
                                                                                             dynamic tests
                                                                                                       tests after
                                                                                                             after applying
                                                                                                                   applying moving
                                                                                                                            moving average
                                                                                                                                   average
                                filter: (a) outdoor environment,    (b) transition  area, and  (c) indoor environment.
                                filter: (a) outdoor environment, (b) transition area, and (c) indoor environment.

                                4. Discussion
                                4.
                                       The             presentedabove
                                       The results presented           aboveshowshowthatthatthe
                                                                                              the   proposed
                                                                                                 proposed     UWBUWB      positioning
                                                                                                                     positioning          method
                                                                                                                                     method      to im-to
                                improve
                                prove thethe      positioning
                                              positioning            accuracy
                                                                accuracy   of UWBof UWB      is feasible
                                                                                      is feasible           and effective.
                                                                                                    and eﬀective.    Our purposeOur purpose       is to
                                                                                                                                       is to improve
                                improve     the accuracy,
                                the accuracy,      robustness,   robustness,    and smoothness
                                                                     and smoothness                    of UWB positioning
                                                                                          of UWB positioning                     results gradually
                                                                                                                     results gradually       by intro-
                                by  introducing
                                ducing               UWB ranging
                                           UWB ranging                   offset calibration,
                                                                oﬀset calibration,     the priortheresidual-based
                                                                                                      prior residual-based
                                                                                                                        robustrobust
                                                                                                                                 theory,theory,
                                                                                                                                            and mov-and
                                moving
                                ing averageaverage
                                                 filter,filter, respectively,
                                                          respectively,     stepstep   by step.
                                                                                  by step.
                                       According
                                       Accordingto    tothethestatistical
                                                                 statisticalresults
                                                                             resultsshown
                                                                                       showninin  Figure
                                                                                                     Figure15,15,
                                                                                                               thethe
                                                                                                                    positioning
                                                                                                                       positioning accuracy
                                                                                                                                       accuracy  upgra-
                                                                                                                                                     up-
                                dation    amplitudes       brought     by applying     ranging     offset  calibration
                                gradation amplitudes brought by applying ranging oﬀset calibration in the three classic   in the three   classic   user
                                environments
                                user environments   are clearly      distinguishable.
                                                            are clearly   distinguishable.  Meanwhile,
                                                                                                 Meanwhile,  the the
                                                                                                                  impact
                                                                                                                      impact of the  ranging
                                                                                                                                of the  ranging  offset
                                                                                                                                                     oﬀ-
                                calibration
                                set calibrationon theonhorizontal       position
                                                           the horizontal          and the
                                                                               position   andvertical   position
                                                                                                 the vertical      are alsoare
                                                                                                                 position     different.   In general,
                                                                                                                                  also diﬀerent.       In
                                the  position
                                general,    the enhancements
                                                  position enhancementsin the vertical
                                                                                   in thedirection      are muchare
                                                                                           vertical direction       moremuch visible
                                                                                                                                 morethan    those
                                                                                                                                         visible   thanin
                                the
                                thosehorizontal     components,
                                        in the horizontal              with about
                                                                   components,        19.5%
                                                                                    with       to 53.1%
                                                                                           about    19.5%intothe   vertical
                                                                                                                53.1%         direction
                                                                                                                         in the  verticaland     about
                                                                                                                                             direction
                                33.1%    in the   horizontal       directions,   respectively.     Wherein,     such   an
                                and about 33.1% in the horizontal directions, respectively. Wherein, such an improvement   improvement        is  more
                                visible   when     using    high-quality      observations      (i.e., in the  outdoor
                                is more visible when using high-quality observations (i.e., in the outdoor environment)    environment)       and    the
                                improvement        will   be  limited   while   observations      suffer  multipath
                                and the improvement will be limited while observations suﬀer multipath and/or NLOS     and/or    NLOS      errors   (i.e.,
                                indoor    environment).
                                errors (i.e.,                    While further
                                                indoor environment).                introducing
                                                                                While                the prior residual-based
                                                                                        further introducing                           robust theory
                                                                                                                   the prior residual-based           ro-
                                to the   ranging     offset-calibrated       UWB     positioning      model,    the
                                bust theory to the ranging oﬀset-calibrated UWB positioning model, the UWB position UWB       position   accuracy       is
                                also  further   improved        especially    for the  epochs    with   visible  gross   observation
                                accuracy is also further improved especially for the epochs with visible gross observation               (i.e., indoor
                                environment)       or without gross
                                (i.e., indoor environment)                 observation
                                                                      or without     grossbut    with somebut
                                                                                             observation       low-accuracy
                                                                                                                   with some observations
                                                                                                                                 low-accuracy(i.e.,  ob-
                                outdoor environment). When there are too many low-accuracy observations (i.e., transition
                                servations (i.e., outdoor environment). When there are too many low-accuracy observa-
                                area), the impact of the adopted robust method would be limited. Generally, such an
                                tions (i.e., transition area), the impact of the adopted robust method would be limited.
                                appearance owes to the basic assumption in Equation (13). As is well known, the robust
                                Generally, such an appearance owes to the basic assumption in Equation (13). As is well
                                method, no matter whether it is based on posterior residuals or prior residuals, assumes the
                                known, the robust method, no matter whether it is based on posterior residuals or prior
                                percentage of low-accuracy and gross observations is no more than 50%. Therefore, when
                                residuals, assumes the percentage of low-accuracy and gross observations is no more than
                                the assumption is satisfied, the robustness would appear; otherwise, the robustness may
                                50%. Therefore, when the assumption is satisfied, the robustness would appear; other-
                                be limited. The moving average filter only takes effect on observation denoising, which is
                                wise, the robustness may be limited. The moving average filter only takes eﬀect on obser-
                                to improve the smoothness of the positioning results but not the accuracy improvements.
                                vation denoising, which is to improve the smoothness of the positioning results but not
                                As the statistics show, the impact of the moving average filter on the UWB positioning
                                the accuracy improvements. As the statistics show, the impact of the moving average filter
                                accuracy is only millimeter level to centimeter level in the three different experiments. To
                                on the UWB positioning accuracy is only millimeter level to centimeter level in the three
                                make the conclusions clearer, we provided the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
                                diﬀerent
                                the  UWB 3D  experiments.
                                                  position errors To make    the conclusions
                                                                       in different   environments clearer,  we provided
                                                                                                         in Figure   16. Thethe CDFcumulative
                                                                                                                                       demonstrates dis-
 Remote
Remote   Sens.
       Sens.   2024,
             2024, 16,16, x FOR
                       x FOR    PEER
                              PEER   REVIEW
                                   REVIEW                                                                                                                 1616ofof1818


 Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                                                  16 of 18
                                    tributionfunction
                                  tribution       function(CDF)
                                                             (CDF)ofofthetheUWB
                                                                              UWB3D   3Dposition
                                                                                           positionerrors
                                                                                                       errorsinindiﬀerent
                                                                                                                    diﬀerentenvironments
                                                                                                                                 environmentsininFig-  Fig-
                                    ure16.
                                  ure     16.The
                                               TheCDF
                                                    CDFdemonstrates
                                                           demonstratesclearly
                                                                             clearlythat
                                                                                       that(1)
                                                                                             (1)the
                                                                                                  theUWB
                                                                                                       UWBpositioning
                                                                                                              positioningaccuracy
                                                                                                                               accuracyisiseﬀectively
                                                                                                                                                eﬀectively
                                    improved
                                  improved
                                     clearly that  after
                                                 after    applying
                                                     (1)applying
                                                         the         rangingoﬀset
                                                              UWBranging
                                                                     positioningoﬀset    calibration,
                                                                                       calibration,
                                                                                     accuracy             whichproves
                                                                                                        which
                                                                                                   is effectively proves     theranging
                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                    improved      ranging     oﬀsetplays
                                                                                                                                            oﬀset
                                                                                                                                   after applying    plays
                                                                                                                                                      rang-
                                  a amain
                                      main
                                     ing       determination
                                             determination
                                          offset   calibration,inin theUWB
                                                                  the
                                                                  which   UWB   positioning
                                                                               positioning
                                                                           proves   the ranging  accuracy;
                                                                                               accuracy;      (2)the
                                                                                                      offset(2)
                                                                                                              playstheprior
                                                                                                                      aprior
                                                                                                                         main   residual-based
                                                                                                                              residual-based
                                                                                                                                  determination     robust
                                                                                                                                                   robust
                                                                                                                                                     in the
                                    theory
                                  theory
                                     UWBmainly mainlycontributes
                                              positioningcontributes
                                                             accuracy;totopositioning
                                                                           positioning
                                                                          (2)               accuracyimprovements,
                                                                              the prioraccuracy
                                                                                           residual-basedimprovements,
                                                                                                               robust theory   especially
                                                                                                                            especially
                                                                                                                                    mainly inincontributes
                                                                                                                                                 challeng-
                                                                                                                                               challeng-
                                    ing
                                  ing     environments;
                                     to environments;
                                         positioning          and(3)
                                                         accuracy
                                                            and    (3)  theimpact
                                                                             impactofofthe
                                                                     improvements,
                                                                      the                  the   movingaverage
                                                                                           especially
                                                                                               moving     inaverage    filteron
                                                                                                             challenging
                                                                                                                     filter    onaccuracy
                                                                                                                                    accuracyimprove-
                                                                                                                               environments;     improve-
                                                                                                                                                    and (3)
                                     the impact
                                    ment
                                  ment              of theslight
                                           isisrelatively
                                                relatively  moving
                                                             slightbut
                                                                     butaverage   filterinin
                                                                           significant
                                                                         significant      on   accuracy the
                                                                                              improving
                                                                                            improving       improvement
                                                                                                             thesmoothness
                                                                                                                  smoothness    is of
                                                                                                                                   relatively
                                                                                                                                     ofthe       slight but
                                                                                                                                         thepositioning
                                                                                                                                              positioning
                                     significant in improving the smoothness of the positioning results.
                                    results.
                                  results.




                                     (a)(a)                                                                                  (b)
                                                                                                                           (b)
                                   Figure15.
                                  Figure  15.Statistical
                                               Statisticalresults
                                                            resultsofofposition
                                                                        positionerror
                                                                                  errorofofthe
                                                                                             thethree
                                                                                                  threedynamic
                                                                                                        dynamictests.
                                                                                                                 tests.(a)(a)RMSE
                                                                                                                              RMSEininthe
                                                                                                                                        thehorizontal
                                                                                                                                            horizontal
                                    Figure 15.  Statistical results   of position  error of the    three dynamic  tests. (a) RMSE     in the horizontal
                                   component.(b)
                                  component.     (b)RMSE
                                                     RMSEininthethevertical
                                                                      verticaldirection.
                                                                               direction.
                                    component. (b) RMSE in the vertical direction.
   Proportion




                                                    Proportion
   Proportion




                                                    Proportion




                                                                                                              Proportion
                                                                                                              Proportion




                                    Figure
                                  Figure
                                     Figure 16.
                                           16.
                                             16. Cumulative
                                               Cumulative    distribution
                                                           distribution
                                                  Cumulative                function
                                                                          function
                                                                distribution        ofof3D
                                                                               function  3D  positioning
                                                                                          ofpositioning   errors
                                                                                                        errors
                                                                                             3D positioning      forthe
                                                                                                               for
                                                                                                              errors  the outdoor
                                                                                                                        outdoor
                                                                                                                       for        test(left),
                                                                                                                                test
                                                                                                                           the outdoor  (left), tran-
                                                                                                                                          testtran-
                                                                                                                                                (left),
                                    sition
                                  sition   test
                                         test   (middle),
                                               (middle),  and
                                                         and   indoor
                                                             indoor     test
                                                                      test   (right).
                                                                           (right).
                                     transition test (middle), and indoor test (right).

                                     5.
                                  5.5.  Conclusions
                                        Conclusions
                                      Conclusions
                                            This
                                           This
                                         This      contribution
                                                   contribution
                                                contribution          proposed
                                                                     proposed
                                                                   proposed           a novel
                                                                                        novel
                                                                                   a anovel    UWBUWB
                                                                                                  UWB       positioning
                                                                                                           positioning
                                                                                                         positioning        model
                                                                                                                           model
                                                                                                                          model       by
                                                                                                                                   byby    introducing
                                                                                                                                          introducing
                                                                                                                                        introducing            a UWB
                                                                                                                                                           a aUWBUWB
                                     rangingoﬀset
                                    ranging
                                  ranging        offsetcalibration
                                                oﬀset     calibration     algorithm,
                                                                          algorithm,aaaprior
                                                          calibrationalgorithm,             prior    residual-based
                                                                                              priorresidual-based         robust
                                                                                                       residual-basedrobust robustalgorithm,
                                                                                                                                      algorithm,and
                                                                                                                                    algorithm,        and
                                                                                                                                                    and   aa moving
                                                                                                                                                              amov-
                                                                                                                                                                 mov-
                                  ingaverage
                                    ing   average
                                        average  filter  into
                                                      filter
                                                    filter into the
                                                             into theextended
                                                                    the  extended
                                                                      extended      Kalman
                                                                                        Kalman
                                                                                      Kalman     filter,  which
                                                                                                     filter,
                                                                                                   filter,    which
                                                                                                            which  isisproven
                                                                                                                       isproven
                                                                                                                          proventototo
                                                                                                                                    be   helpful
                                                                                                                                      bebe  helpful
                                                                                                                                          helpful   in  upgrading
                                                                                                                                                     inin  upgrad-
                                                                                                                                                         upgrad-
                                  ingUWB
                                    ing   UWB
                                        UWB   positioning
                                                   positioning
                                                 positioning   accuracy
                                                                     accuracy
                                                                   accuracy  and andreliability.
                                                                                    and              TheThe
                                                                                          reliability.
                                                                                        reliability.       experimental
                                                                                                            Theexperimental
                                                                                                                 experimental results   collected
                                                                                                                                     results
                                                                                                                                   results            under
                                                                                                                                                collected
                                                                                                                                             collected           three
                                                                                                                                                                under
                                                                                                                                                            under
                                     classic   user
                                    threeclassic
                                  three               scenes
                                             classicuser        (indoor,
                                                       userscenes
                                                              scenes(indoor,outdoor,
                                                                       (indoor,outdoor,   and
                                                                                     outdoor,and their   transition
                                                                                                    andtheir           area)
                                                                                                          theirtransition     demonstrated
                                                                                                                 transitionarea)
                                                                                                                               area)demonstrated   the
                                                                                                                                       demonstratedthe  validity
                                                                                                                                                               theva- of
                                                                                                                                                                    va-
                                     the
                                  lidity  proposed
                                    lidityofofthe        method.
                                                 theproposed
                                                      proposedmethod.method.
                                            In
                                         InIn   general,
                                               general,
                                             general,       after
                                                           after
                                                          after     applying
                                                                   applying
                                                                 applying      ourour
                                                                                 our    method,
                                                                                        method,
                                                                                      method,          the
                                                                                                      the
                                                                                                    the     UWB
                                                                                                           UWB
                                                                                                         UWB        positioning
                                                                                                                   positioning
                                                                                                                 positioning        accuracy
                                                                                                                                    accuracy
                                                                                                                                  accuracy        in
                                                                                                                                               inin   terms
                                                                                                                                                     terms
                                                                                                                                                   terms     ofofof  the
                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                     root  mean
                                    rootmean
                                  root     meansquaresquare
                                                     squareerrorerror  values
                                                               errorvalues
                                                                       valuescan   can   be  improved
                                                                                  canbebeimproved
                                                                                             improvedwith    with    position
                                                                                                             withposition       improvement
                                                                                                                     positionimprovement             percentages
                                                                                                                                improvementpercentages
                                                                                                                                                     percentages
                                     of  67.1%,
                                  ofof67.1%,       22.2%,
                                        67.1%,22.2%,
                                                   22.2%,and and
                                                            and50.5%50.5%     in
                                                                   50.5%ininthe   the  environments
                                                                                 theenvironments
                                                                                       environmentsofofindoor,of indoor,     outdoor,
                                                                                                                indoor,outdoor,
                                                                                                                           outdoor,and   and    transition
                                                                                                                                         andtransition
                                                                                                                                               transitionareas,  areas,
                                                                                                                                                                areas,
                                     respectively.      Specifically,
                                    respectively.Specifically,
                                  respectively.         Specifically,(1) (1)  after
                                                                          (1)after   applying
                                                                               afterapplying
                                                                                      applyingthe   the  ranging
                                                                                                     theranging      offset
                                                                                                           rangingoﬀset      compensation,
                                                                                                                       oﬀsetcompensation,
                                                                                                                              compensation,the    the  positioning
                                                                                                                                                    theposition-
                                                                                                                                                          position-
                                  ingaccuracy
                                    ing   accuracy
                                        accuracy  cancanbe
                                                         canimproved
                                                             bebeimproved
                                                                   improved by 20%     to20%
                                                                                  byby20%  50%.     Wherein,
                                                                                               toto50%.          the vertical
                                                                                                      50%.Wherein,
                                                                                                              Wherein,           accuracy
                                                                                                                            thevertical
                                                                                                                          the                 was increased
                                                                                                                                 verticalaccuracy
                                                                                                                                             accuracy       wasin-
                                                                                                                                                          was         by
                                                                                                                                                                     in-
                                     53.1%,    19.5%,
                                    creasedbyby53.1%,     and   48.6%,
                                                     53.1%,19.5%,
                                                               19.5%,and   respectively,
                                                                        and48.6%,             in
                                                                               48.6%,respectively, indoor,    outdoor,
                                                                                          respectively,ininindoor,         and
                                                                                                                 indoor,outdoor, transition
                                                                                                                            outdoor,and         areas,
                                                                                                                                         andtransition   while
                                                                                                                                               transitionareas,     the
                                                                                                                                                                areas,
                                  creased
                                     horizontal
                                    while            accuracy was
                                              thehorizontal
                                                   horizontal           increased
                                                                   accuracy            by   26.1% and
                                                                                 wasincreased
                                                                                        increased           33.1%,    respectively,    in indoor and        outdoor
                                  while    the                   accuracy      was                    byby26.1%
                                                                                                             26.1%and and  33.1%,respectively,
                                                                                                                          33.1%,      respectively,    ininindoor
                                                                                                                                                               indoor
                                     environments. In the transition area, the horizontal accuracy decreased slightly, but only
                                    andoutdoor
                                  and      outdoorenvironments.
                                                         environments.InInthe        thetransition
                                                                                           transitionarea,  area,thethehorizontal
                                                                                                                          horizontalaccuracy
                                                                                                                                          accuracydecreased
                                                                                                                                                        decreased
                                     produced centimeter-level or even millimeter-level changes. (2) The prior residual-based
                                    slightly,but
                                  slightly,       butonly
                                                        onlyproduced
                                                                producedcentimeter-level
                                                                                centimeter-levelororeven      evenmillimeter-level
                                                                                                                       millimeter-levelchanges.
                                                                                                                                             changes.(2)    (2)The The
                                     robust algorithm brings about 5.9%, 1.8%, and 5.9% position improvements in indoor,
                                     outdoor, and transition areas, respectively. (3) The moving average filter can effectively
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                         17 of 18



                                 optimize the positioning results only in terms of smoothness but without significantly
                                 impacting the positioning accuracy.
                                       In general, the proposed UWB positioning method is proven to be effective in up-
                                 grading the UWB positioning accuracy in classic user environments (indoor, outdoor,
                                 and transition areas). Even so, UWB will fail to provide position service while suffering
                                 serious signal blocking. Moreover, UWB positioning accuracy evaluations are based on
                                 the Euclidean distance and three classic environments, which cannot comprehensively
                                 show the positioning accuracy. Therefore, our works in the future are (1) to introduce
                                 multi-sensors such as inertial sensors, camera, and LiDAR into our UWB positioning sys-
                                 tem, by which the continuity, reliability, and accuracy can be further upgraded in more
                                 complex user environments by introducing external heterogeneous measurements and
                                 (2) finding a more credible accuracy evaluation method under situations with more persons
                                 and more obstacles.

                                 Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.L. (Junhao Liu) and Z.G.; data curation, J.L. (Junhao Liu),
                                 S.L. and J.L. (Jia Liu); funding acquisition, Z.G.; investigation, Z.G. and Y.L.; methodology, J.L. (Junhao
                                 Liu), Z.G. and Y.L.; software, J.L. (Junhao Liu) and Y.L.; validation, J.L. (Junhao Liu); visualization,
                                 Z.G. and C.Y.; writing—original draft, J.L. (Junhao Liu); writing—review and editing, J.L. (Junhao
                                 Liu), Z.G. and C.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                 Funding: This work was partially funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
                                 (NSFC) (Grants No. 42274022 and 42274024).
                                  Data Availability Statement: The datasets adopted in this paper can be available on request from the
                                  corresponding author.
                                 Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers who gave valuable
                                 suggestions that helped to improve the quality of the manuscript.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.    Teunissen, P.J.G. Integer least-squares theory for the GNSS compass. J. Geod. 2010, 84, 433–447. [CrossRef]
2.    Lachapelle, G. GNSS indoor location technologies. J. Glob. Position. Syst. 2004, 3, 2–11. [CrossRef]
3.    Ghinamo, G.; Detoma, E.; Cavallo, D.; Boiero, G.; Lovisolo, P.; Torre, A.D. Analysis of the Accuracy of Indoor GNSS Measurements
      and Positioning Solution. In Proceedings of the European Navigation Conference 2008, Toulouse, France, 22–25 April 2008.
4.    Zhe, H.; Petovello, M.; Ling, P.; Olesen, D.M. Evaluation of GPS/BDS indoor positioning performance and enhancement. Adv.
      Space Res. 2017, 59, 870–876.
5.    Mautz, R. Indoor Positioning Technologies. Ph.D. Thesis, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 2012.
6.    Dabove, P.; Pietra, V.D.; Piras, M.; Jabbar, A.A.; Kazim, S.A. Indoor positioning using Ultra-wide band (UWB) technologies:
      Positioning accuracies and sensors’ performances. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ION Position, Location and Navigation
      Symposium (PLANS), Monterey, CA, USA, 26 April 2018; pp. 175–184.
7.    Ledergerber, A.; D’Andrea, R. Ultra-wideband range measurement model with Gaussian processes. In Proceedings of the 2017
      IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA), Kohala Coast, HI, USA, 27–30 August 2017; pp. 1929–1934.
8.    Wang, Y.; Yang, X.; Zhao, Y.; Liu, Y.; Cuthbert, L. Bluetooth positioning using RSSI and triangulation methods. In Proceedings of
      the 2013 IEEE 10th Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 11–14 January 2013;
      pp. 837–842.
9.    Cheng, Y.; Zhou, T. UWB Indoor Positioning Algorithm Based on TDOA Technology. In Proceedings of the 2019 10th International
      Conference on Information Technology in Medicine and Education (ITME), Qingdao, China, 23–25 August 2019; pp. 777–782.
10.   Tian, Z.; Wang, Z.; Li, Z.; Zhou, M. RTIL: A Real-Time Indoor Localization System by Using Angle of Arrival of Commodity WiFi
      Signal. In Proceedings of the 2019 11th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP),
      Xi’an, China, 23–25 October 2019; pp. 1–6.
11.   Schmid, L.; Salido-Monzú, D.; Wieser, A. Accuracy Assessment and Learned Error Mitigation of UWB ToF Ranging. In
      Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Pisa, Italy, 30 September–3
      October 2019; pp. 1–8.
12.   Mahfouz, M.R.; Fathy, A.E.; Kuhn, M.J.; Wang, Y. Recent trends and advances in UWB positioning. In Proceedings of the
      2009 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop on Wireless Sensing, Local Positioning, and RFID, Cavtat, Croatia, 24–25
      September 2009; pp. 1–4.
Remote Sens. 2024, 16, 2511                                                                                                      18 of 18



13.   Poulose, A.; Eyobu, O.S.; Kim, M.; Han, D.S. Localization Error Analysis of Indoor Positioning System Based on UWB Measure-
      ments. In Proceedings of the 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), Zagreb,
      Croatia, 2–5 July 2019; pp. 84–88.
14.   Dierenbach, K.; Ostrowski, S.; Jozkow, G.; Toth, C.K.; Grejner-Brzezinska, D.A.; Koppanyi, Z. UWB for navigation in GNSS
      compromised environments. In Proceedings of the 28th international technical meeting of the satellite division of the institute of
      navigation (ION GNSS+ 2015), Tampa, FL, USA, 14–18 September 2015; pp. 2380–2389.
15.   Yang, G.; Zhao, L.; Dai, Y.; Xu, Y. A KFL-TOA UWB indoor positioning method for complex environment. In Proceedings of the
      2017 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), Jinan, China, 20–22 October 2017; pp. 3010–3014.
16.   Park, J.W.; Nam, S.C.; Choi, H.B.; Ko, Y.E.; Ko, Y.B. Improving deep learning-based UWB LOS/NLOS identification with transfer
      learning: An empirical approach. Electronics 2020, 9, 1714. [CrossRef]
17.   Barral, V.; Escudero, C.J.; García-Naya, J.A.; Suárez-Casal, P. Environmental cross-validation of NLOS machine learning classifica-
      tion/mitigation with low-cost UWB positioning systems. Sensors 2019, 19, 5438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Chen, L.; Gao, Z.; Xu, Q.; Yang, C.; Li, Y. Comprehensive Evaluation of Robust and Tight Integration of UWB and Low-cost IMU.
      IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 26411–26422. [CrossRef]
19.   Denis, B.; Keignart, J.; Daniele, N. Impact of NLOS propagation upon ranging precision in UWB systems. In Proceedings of the
      IEEE Conference on Ultra Wideband Systems and Technologies, Reston, VA, USA, 16–19 November 2003; pp. 379–383.
20.   Dong, M. A low-cost NLOS identification and mitigation method for UWB ranging in static and dynamic environments. IEEE
      Commun. Lett. 2021, 25, 2420–2424. [CrossRef]
21.   Nguyen, D.T.A.; Lee, H.G.; Jeong, E.R.; Lee, H.L.; Joung, J. Deep learning-based localization for UWB systems. Electronics 2020, 9,
      1712. [CrossRef]
22.   Tian, Q.; Kevin, I.; Wang, K.; Salcic, Z. An INS and UWB fusion approach with adaptive ranging error mitigation for pedestrian
      tracking. IEEE Sens. J. 2020, 20, 4372–4381. [CrossRef]
23.   Smaoui, N.; Gnawali, O.; Kim, K. Study and mitigation of platform related uwb ranging errors. In Proceedings of the 2020
      International Conference on COMmunication Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), Bengaluru, India, 7–11 January 2020; pp.
      346–353.
24.   Borhan, N.; Saleh, I.; Yunus, A.; Rahiman, W.; Novaliendry, D. Reducing UWB Indoor Localization Error Using the Fusion of
      Kalman Filter with Moving Average Filter. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Automatic Control and
      Intelligent Systems (I2CACIS), Shah Alam, Malaysia, 17 June 2023; pp. 55–59.
25.   Guo, S.; Zhang, Y.; Gui, X.; Han, L. An Improved PDR/UWB Integrated System for Indoor Navigation Applications. IEEE Sens. J.
      2020, 20, 8046–8061. [CrossRef]
26.   Liu, T.; Li, B.; Chen, G.; Yang, L.; Qiao, J.; Chen, W. Tightly Coupled Integration of GNSS/UWB/VIO for Reliable and Seamless
      Positioning. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2024, 25, 2116–2128. [CrossRef]
27.   Han, H.; Wang, J.; Liu, F.; Zhang, J.; Yang, D.; Li, B. An Emergency Seamless Positioning Technique Based on ad hoc UWB
      Networking Using Robust EKF. Sensors 2019, 19, 3135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Wang, C.; Han, H.; Wang, J.; Yu, H.; Yang, D. A Robust Extended Kalman Filter Applied to Ultrawideband Positioning. Math.
      Probl. Eng. 2020, 2020, 1809262. [CrossRef]
29.   Ghanem, E.; O’Keefe, K.; Klukas, R. Testing vehicle-to-vehicle relative position and attitude estimation using multiple UWB
      ranging. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 92nd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Fall), Victoria, BC, Canada, 18
      November–16 December 2020; pp. 1–5.
30.   Jiang, Y.; Pan, S.; Meng, Q.; Zhang, M.; Gao, W.; Ma, C. Performance Analysis of Robust Tightly Coupled GNSS/INS Integration
      Positioning Based on M Estimation in Challenging Environments. In Proceedings of the China Satellite Navigation Conference
      (CSNC 2022) Proceedings, Singapore, 25 May 2022; pp. 400–414.
31.   Li, Y.; Gao, Z.; Xu, Q.; Yang, C. Comprehensive Evaluations of NLOS and Linearization Errors on UWB Positioning. Appl. Sci.
      2023, 13, 6187. [CrossRef]
32.   Koswatta, R.; Karmakar, N.C. Moving average filtering technique for signal processing in digital section of UWB chipless RFID
      reader. In Proceedings of the 2010 Asia-Pacific Microwave Conference, Yokohama, Japan, 7–10 December 2010; pp. 1304–1307.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
