Review

Machine Learning Integration in Ultra-Wideband-Based Indoor
Positioning Systems: A Comprehensive Review
Juan Carlos Santamaria-Pedrón 1 , Rafael Berkvens 2 , Ignacio Miralles 1 , Carlos Reaño 1                                     and Joaquín
Torres-Sospedra 1,3, *

                                         1   Departament d’Informàtica, Escola Tècnica Superior d’Enginyeria (ETSE), Universitat de València, Avda.
                                             Universitat S/N, 46100 Burjassot, Spain; juan.santamaria@uv.es (J.C.S.-P.); ignacio.miralles@uv.es (I.M.);
                                             carlos.reano@uv.es (C.R.)
                                         2   Faculty of Applied Engineering, imec–IDLab, University of Antwerp, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium;
                                             rafael.berkvens@uantwerpen.be
                                         3   Valencian Graduate School and Research Network of Artificial Intelligence (VALGRAI), Camí de Vera S/N,
                                             Edificio 3Q, 46022 Valencia, Spain
                                         *   Correspondence: joaquin.torres@uv.es


                                         Abstract
                                         Ultra-Wideband (UWB) technology enables centimeter-level indoor positioning, but it
                                         remains highly sensitive to channel dynamics, multipath and Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS)
                                         propagation. Recent studies increasingly apply Machine Learning (ML) methods to ad-
                                         dress these issues by modeling nonlinear channel behavior and mitigating ranging bias.
                                         This paper presents a comprehensive review and provides a critical synthesis of 169 re-
                                         search works published between 2020 and 2024, offering an integrated overview of how
                                         ML techniques are incorporated into UWB-based Indoor Positioning Systems (IPSs). The
                                         studies are grouped according to their functional objective, learning algorithm, network
                                         architecture, evaluation metrics, dataset, and experimental setting. The results indicate
                                         that most approaches apply ML to channel classification and ranging error mitigation,
                                         with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Support Vector Machines (SVMs), and
                                         hybrid CNN–Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architectures being among the most com-
                                         mon choices due to their ability to capture spatial and temporal patterns in the Channel
                                         Impulse Response (CIR). Despite the reported accuracy improvements, scalability and
                                         cross-environment generalization remain open challenges, largely due to the scarcity of
                                         public datasets and the lack of standardized evaluation protocols. Emerging research trends
                                         highlight growing interest in transfer learning, domain adaptation, and federated learning,
                                         along with lightweight and explainable models suitable for embedded and multi-sensor
                                         systems. Overall, this review summarizes the progress made in ML-driven UWB localiza-
                                         tion, identifies current gaps, and outlines promising directions toward more robust and
                                         generalizable indoor positioning frameworks.

Academic Editor: Jung Min Pak            Keywords: ultra-wideband; indoor positioning; machine learning; deep learning; channel
Received: 28 November 2025
                                         impulse response; non-line-of-sight classification; ranging error mitigation; transfer learning
Revised: 22 December 2025
Accepted: 25 December 2025
Published: 30 December 2025
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.        1. Introduction
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                              Short-range wireless technologies designed for low power consumption and moderate
This article is an open access article
                                         data rates have been used for many years in personal and local area networks. Examples
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                         include Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Zigbee, Wi-Fi, and Ultra-Wideband (UWB), which
Attribution (CC BY) license.             provide reliable and energy-efficient short-range communication. Among them, UWB


Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                              2 of 56




                            stands out for its very precise ranging and localization based on Time-of-Flight (ToF) mea-
                            surements. Although UWB was originally developed for short-range data transmission, it
                            has recently become one of the most promising technologies for high-accuracy indoor posi-
                            tioning [1]. Its precision mainly comes from the availability of physical-layer parameters
                            such as Received Signal Strength (RSS), ToF, and Channel Impulse Response (CIR), which
                            offer detailed signal information useful for estimating distances and positions in indoor
                            environments. For this reason, UWB is now considered a key technology for accurate and
                            reliable indoor localization systems.
                                 Given the increasing interest in accurate indoor positioning, several technologies have
                            been proposed to implement Indoor Positioning Systems (IPSs), which estimate the position
                            of objects or users inside buildings, where satellite-based systems such as Global Positioning
                            System (GPS) do not work properly. Among the available wireless options, UWB has
                            become in recent years the most accurate solution for indoor localization, offering much
                            higher precision than other short-range alternatives such as BLE, Wi-Fi, or Zigbee. Under
                            normal conditions, UWB provides sub-meter accuracy, and in optimized Line-of-Sight (LoS)
                            scenarios it can reach centimeter-level precision, as demonstrated in several experimental
                            studies [2]. Comparative works have also confirmed that it generally performs better
                            than other modern wireless positioning technologies in terms of accuracy [3]. Moreover,
                            large-scale deployments with multiple tags have shown high precision and reliability,
                            demonstrating the maturity of UWB-based IPSs for real-world indoor localization [4].
                                 Although UWB-based positioning provides high accuracy, it still faces several chal-
                            lenges in real-world environments. As with other radio-based systems, multipath prop-
                            agation, Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS) conditions, antenna orientation, and the presence of
                            obstacles or moving people can cause significant ranging errors. In severe NLoS situations,
                            these errors can even exceed one meter. Traditional geometry-based positioning methods
                            estimate distances or angles from signal parameters such as ToF or Time Difference of
                            Arrival (TDoA), and then compute the coordinates through multilateration or triangula-
                            tion. However, under NLoS or multipath conditions, these approaches are very sensitive
                            to distorted signal paths and inaccurate range measurements, which can lead to biased
                            position estimates.
                                 To address these limitations, hybrid solutions have been proposed, for example, by
                            combining UWB with Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors, in order to improve ro-
                            bustness and maintain reasonable accuracy even in difficult conditions [5–7]. However,
                            although sensor-fusion strategies enhance robustness, they still depend on explicit geo-
                            metric models and traditional signal processing steps. These approaches often struggle to
                            adapt to different environments or hardware setups. In recent years, data-driven methods
                            based on Machine Learning (ML) have been investigated as a promising alternative [8,9].
                            Several studies have used signal features such as the CIR to capture complex propagation
                            effects and estimate positions directly [10].
                                 These challenges have increased the interest in ML as an alternative to traditional
                            signal processing and geometry-based positioning methods. Instead of depending only on
                            predefined propagation models, ML techniques can use channel information such as the
                            CIR or other parameters derived from the received signal, including RSS and ToF. Early
                            research applied ML to identify LoS/NLoS conditions, helping to improve data selection
                            and reduce bias in geometric solvers [8]. Later works explored regression and neural
                            models to correct ranging errors before multilateration or triangulation, thus improving
                            robustness under challenging propagation conditions [6,9]. More recently, ML-based
                            fingerprinting and feature-matching methods have been used to estimate user positions
                            directly from channel features, achieving competitive accuracy even in complex indoor
                            environments [10,11].



                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                                                 3 of 56




                                  In recent years, there has been a clear growth in publications exploring the intersection
                            between UWB and ML, as illustrated in Figure 1. This reflects a broader trend towards
                            integrating data-driven methods into communication and localization systems. The bib-
                            liometric data were obtained from Scopus using the same query described in Section 4,
                            that is, the exact search string combining Ultra-Wideband, Machine Learning, and indoor
                            positioning-related terms. The search was applied to titles, abstracts, and author keywords,
                            covering all document types indexed in Scopus between 2004 and 2024. Before 2018, pub-
                            lications explicitly combining UWB and ML were quite limited, since most studies still
                            depended on traditional model-based signal processing and localization methods. The clear
                            increase after 2018 coincides with the availability of open UWB datasets and the spread of
                            Deep Learning (DL) architectures, which enabled data-driven analysis of channel features
                            and localization performance. As shown in the figure, the number of publications started
                            to rise significantly after 2018 and more than doubled between 2020 and 2024, showing the
                            fast convergence of UWB and ML research. This growing trend highlights the increasing
                            importance of this intersection and supports the need for a comprehensive overview of
                            current works and open challenges.

                                                      120




                                                      100




                                                       80
                             Number of Publications




                                                       60




                                                       40




                                                       20




                                                       0
                                                             04



                                                                   06



                                                                         08



                                                                               10



                                                                                     12



                                                                                                14



                                                                                                         16



                                                                                                               18



                                                                                                                     20



                                                                                                                           22



                                                                                                                                 24
                                                            20



                                                                  20



                                                                        20



                                                                              20



                                                                                    20



                                                                                              20



                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                              20



                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                          20



                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                          Publication Year



                            Figure 1. Number of publications per year found in Scopus using the same query explained in the
                            methodology section. The search included all types of documents that combine UWB and ML in
                            the field of indoor positioning. The trend line corresponds to a LOESS curve (Locally Estimated
                            Scatterplot Smoothing), a non-parametric local regression used to highlight the overall growth pattern.
                            The strong increase in recent years shows the rising interest in this topic and the motivation for
                            carrying out a comprehensive review.

                                 Despite the increasing number of studies, to the best of our knowledge, no compre-
                            hensive review has yet examined the intersection of UWB and ML in a clear and structured
                            way. Existing surveys have discussed specific aspects of UWB-based localization or fo-
                            cused on popular topics in positioning research for Wi-Fi, BLE, or general indoor systems.
                            However, none of them have systematically analyzed how ML can be applied throughout
                            the entire UWB positioning pipeline, from channel condition classification to ranging error
                            correction and position estimation. UWB systems are fundamentally different from other
                            short-range technologies in their signal structure (for example, wide bandwidth and high
                            time resolution) and in the availability of rich physical-layer features such as CIR and
                            ToF. These characteristics introduce specific ML challenges, including multipath charac-
                            terization, NLoS detection, and range error mitigation. Overall, this study is framed as a



                                                                                                                                      https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                               4 of 56




                            comprehensive review conducted using a systematic methodology, enabling a structured
                            and reproducible assessment of ML contributions to UWB-based indoor positioning.
                                 Specifically, this paper aims to:
                            •    Identify and categorize the main UWB-related tasks where ML models are applied to
                                 improve indoor positioning accuracy and robustness.
                            •    Review the most common ML models and architectures used for UWB-based localiza-
                                 tion and signal processing.
                            •    Summarize the evaluation metrics and experimental setups reported in UWB–ML
                                 research for performance analysis.
                            •    Highlight the main limitations and open challenges found in the literature, providing
                                 directions for future studies on UWB–ML integration.
                                  This review provides a structured and reproducible overview of the current state of
                            the field, aiming to help both researchers and practitioners to advance high-accuracy IPSs.
                                  Overall, the analysis indicates that most studies applying ML to UWB localization
                            focus on channel condition classification and ranging error correction, while a smaller
                            but growing number address position estimation. DL architectures, especially Convolu-
                            tional Neural Networks (CNNs), Long Short-Term Memories (LSTMs), and hybrid models,
                            dominate recent work due to their ability to model spatio-temporal dependencies in the
                            CIR. However, reproducibility and cross-environment generalization remain open chal-
                            lenges, mainly due to the limited number of open datasets and the absence of standardized
                            evaluation benchmarks.
                                  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews existing surveys
                            and highlights the specific gap that this work aims to fill. Section 4 describes the review
                            methodology used to ensure a comprehensive and unbiased analysis. The main results
                            are presented in Section 5, where both quantitative and qualitative answers to the research
                            questions are discussed. Section 6 analyzes these results, highlighting the main trends,
                            limitations, and implications for the field. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and
                            proposes a roadmap with clear directions for future research toward robust and intelligent
                            UWB-based positioning systems.

                            2. Related Work
                                 Indoor positioning has been widely reviewed during the last decade, although existing
                            surveys differ in their scope, methodology, and application focus. To provide a clear context
                            for this review, the related literature is organized into a logical narrative sequence. We
                            begin by positioning UWB within the broader landscape of alternative indoor positioning
                            technologies to highlight its distinct advantages. Subsequently, we analyze broad IPS
                            surveys that encompass UWB, followed by a review of early UWB-specific studies and
                            general ML-focused surveys. Finally, recent domain-specific UWB reviews are examined.
                            This organization serves to identify the specific gap where the intersection between modern
                            ML techniques and the complete UWB positioning pipeline remains unexplored.

                            2.1. Overview of Alternative Indoor Positioning Technologies
                                 While this review focuses on UWB, it is important to contextualize its role within the
                            broader landscape of indoor positioning technologies. A wide range of physical media
                            have been explored by researchers, including radio-frequency-based, optical, magnetic,
                            and acoustic signals, as discussed in general surveys [12,13]. Each technology exhibits
                            distinct propagation characteristics and limitations, where ML is increasingly employed to
                            improve robustness and accuracy.
                                 Visible Light Communication (VLC) systems exploit Light-Emitting Diode (LED)-
                            based lighting infrastructure to enable high-precision indoor positioning. Recent compre-



                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                5 of 56




                                    hensive surveys highlight the growing role of ML and DL in compensating for non-linear
                                    optical channels [14], while specific neural network-based approaches have been applied
                                    to optimize energy efficiency in Simultaneous Lightwave Information and Power Trans-
                                    fer (SLIPT)-enabled frameworks [15]. However, unlike UWB, VLC positioning remains
                                    strongly constrained by LoS conditions.
                                          Magnetic-based localization exploits disturbances in the Earth’s magnetic field or
                                    actively generated Magneto-Inductive (MI) fields. These techniques are particularly suitable
                                    for underground or radio-denied environments. In this context, ML is commonly applied
                                    through fingerprinting and pattern recognition to handle the non-uniqueness of magnetic
                                    signatures [13]. Despite their robustness to NLoS, such systems typically offer shorter
                                    operational ranges than UWB.
                                          Wi-Fi and BLE technologies are among the most widely deployed solutions for indoor
                                    positioning due to their low deployment cost and existing infrastructure. However, they
                                    suffer from significant signal variability and multipath effects. As a result, ML-based
                                    fingerprinting techniques are extensively used to model complex propagation patterns,
                                    although the achievable positioning accuracy (typically 1-5 m) remains lower than that of
                                    UWB systems [16].
                                         Table 1 provides a summary comparison of these technologies, highlighting their operat-
                                    ing principles, typical accuracy, and the primary role of ML in enhancing their performance.

                                    Table 1. Comparison of indoor positioning technologies and the role of ML.

 Technology         Mechanism                  Accuracy           Main ML Application
 UWB                ToF/TDoA/AoA               Centimeter-level   NLoS classification, bias mitigation, and direct pulse processing.
 Wi-Fi/BLE          RSS/CSI Fingerprinting     Meter-level        Learning complex signal maps to handle fluctuations [16].
 VLC                RSS/AoA (Optical)          Centimeter-level   Channel modeling, non-linearity compensation, and energy optimization [14].
 Magnetic/MI        Field Strength/Anomalies   Meter-level        Pattern matching and anomaly detection for magnetic signatures.
 Acoustic           ToF (Sound)                Centimeter-level   Echo classification and reverberation mitigation.


                                    2.2. Broad IPS Surveys Including UWB
                                          Several surveys have taken a broader view, covering different indoor positioning tech-
                                    nologies. For instance, Zafari et al. [12] and Mendoza-Silva et al. [13] proposed taxonomies
                                    that include Wi-Fi, BLE, ZigBee, UWB, and other systems. However, in these earlier surveys,
                                    UWB is often discussed at a high level without focusing on its distinct signal structure. This
                                    gap is addressed in very recent high-impact surveys. Santra et al. [17] extensively review
                                    ML for radio frequency sensing, covering radar and Wi-Fi in depth while providing valuable
                                    context for UWB integration. Complementing this, Fischer et al. [18] provide a comprehensive
                                    analysis of angular-based localization technologies in 2025, comparing UWB against Acoustic
                                    and 5G/6G systems. Similarly, Umer et al. [19] explore the integration of UWB within the 6G
                                    ecosystem, specifically focusing on Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface (RIS)-assisted localiza-
                                    tion. Unlike general reviews, these recent contributions highlight the increasing convergence
                                    of UWB with beamforming and intelligent surfaces.

                                    2.3. Early UWB-Focused Surveys
                                          One of the first and most influential surveys in the field was published by Alarifi
                                    et al. [20], providing a broad overview of indoor positioning methods with a dedicated
                                    section on UWB. Beyond proposing a useful taxonomy, that work applied a strengths,
                                    weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis, a framework seldom utilized in
                                    this domain, to evaluate the relative merits of different technologies. Similarly, Mazhar
                                    et al. [21] reviewed UWB-based positioning in comparison with narrowband systems, dis-
                                    cussing both algorithmic foundations and practical implementation challenges. Although


                                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                              6 of 56




                            these early papers provide essential insights into UWB fundamentals, their focus remains
                            primarily on hardware and geometric algorithmic aspects, with only limited discussion of
                            ML-based methods. More recently, Ridolfi et al. [22] presented a detailed review of UWB
                            self-calibration and collaborative localization methods. However, while it offers an exten-
                            sive overview of system architectures, it continues to rely on traditional geometry-based
                            solvers and does not explore the emerging field of data-driven or ML-based approaches.

                            2.4. ML-Focused Surveys in IPS
                                 One of the first surveys to explicitly examine the role of ML in indoor positioning
                            was published by Nessa et al. [16], who reviewed algorithms such as Support Vector
                            Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), CNN, and LSTM across different IPS applications.
                            This work highlighted the potential of ML to improve positioning performance. However,
                            UWB was only mentioned briefly and not analyzed in detail. Therefore, although ML is
                            now widely recognized as an important technology for IPS, its application to UWB-based
                            systems is still not well explored.

                            2.5. Recent UWB Surveys in Specific Domains
                                 Several recent reviews have brought the attention back to UWB, often focusing on
                            specific domains or application areas. For example, Elsanhoury et al. [23] analyzed the use
                            of UWB in logistics and industrial navigation, mentioning ML only briefly and without
                            proposing a clear taxonomy. Wang et al. [24] concentrated exclusively on NLoS identifica-
                            tion and mitigation, comparing classical and ML-based methods, but this narrow scope
                            covers only one stage of the IPS pipeline. In a broader context, Hapsari et al. [25] applied
                            systematic mapping techniques to discuss open challenges in UWB tag localization, yet
                            without explicitly connecting them to ML-driven solutions. Lastly, Al-Okby et al. [26] re-
                            viewed real-time UWB modules and systems, focusing mainly on hardware characteristics
                            and descriptive comparisons, with only limited reference to ML integration.
                                 Table 2 summarizes the main characteristics of the reviewed surveys. Overall, existing
                            reviews can be grouped into three categories: those focused on UWB but not on ML, those
                            centered on ML with little attention to UWB, and a few recent works combining both but
                            limited to specific tasks such as NLoS detection. In contrast, this review provides a holistic
                            perspective by covering the entire positioning pipeline and the reproducibility aspects
                            often neglected in previous studies.
                                 Some surveys also use structured approaches such as strengths, weaknesses, opportu-
                            nities, and threats analysis or systematic mapping, offering additional perspectives on UWB
                            positioning. However, their scope is still limited and they do not provide an integrated
                            taxonomy linking ML methods with UWB-specific tasks along the IPS pipeline. More-
                            over, reproducibility aspects, such as datasets and evaluation metrics, are rarely discussed
                            in depth.
                                 Against this background, while previous surveys have addressed important aspects of
                            indoor positioning, several areas for further analysis remain. Early UWB-focused reviews
                            largely predate the widespread adoption of DL techniques, whereas broader IPS surveys
                            often consider UWB at a high level, without fully exploiting its distinctive CIR-level
                            characteristics. Moreover, recent ML-oriented surveys tend to focus on isolated tasks,
                            such as NLoS detection or ranging correction, leaving an opportunity for a more holistic
                            view of how learning-based components integrate across the full positioning pipeline.
                            Furthermore, reproducibility aspects, including the availability of public datasets and
                            standardized evaluation protocols, are often discussed only briefly.




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                         7 of 56




                             Table 2. Comparison of representative survey papers related to indoor positioning and UWB-based
                             localization, highlighting their coverage of ML, datasets, and evaluation aspects.

 Article                           Year     UWB       ML      LoS/NLoS        CIR Use       Fusion/Hybrid        Dataset      Metrics
 Alarifi et al. [20]               2016       ✓        ✗           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ∼
 Mazhar et al. [21]                2017       ✓        ✗           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ∼
 Zafari et al. [12]                2019       ✓        ✗           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ∼
 Mendoza-Silva et al. [13]         2019       ✓        ✗           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ✗
 Nessa et al. [16]                 2020       ∼        ✓           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ✓
 Ridolfi et al. [22]               2021       ✓        ✗           ∼              ∼                 ∼                ✗           ∼
 Elsanhoury et al. [23]            2022       ✓        ∼           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ✗
 Wang et al. [24]                  2023       ✓        ✓           ∼              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ✓
 Hapsari et al. [25]               2024       ✓        ∼           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ✗
 Al-Okby et al. [26]               2024       ✓        ∼           ✗              ✗                 ✗                ✗           ∼
 Santra et al. [17]                2025       ✓        ✓           ∼              ∼                 ✓                ✗           ∼
 Fischer et al. [18]               2025       ✓        ∼           ✓              ✗                 ✓                ✗           ✓
 Umer et al. [19]                  2025       ✓        ✓           ✓              ∼                 ✓                ✗           ∼
 This review                       2025       ✓        ✓           ✓              ✓                 ✓                ✓           ✓
                             Symbols: ✓ = Covered in detail; ∼ = Partially covered; ✗ = Not addressed.


                                  Motivated by these observations, the present review provides a structured analysis
                             of the intersection between ML and UWB-based indoor positioning. By following the Pre-
                             ferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) framework,
                             this work aims to minimize selection bias and provide a transparent, reproducible synthesis
                             of recent literature. This effort seeks to complement earlier reviews by bridging the gap
                             between isolated algorithmic improvements and a comprehensive understanding of current
                             trends, methodological choices, and open challenges in data-driven UWB systems.

                             3. Background
                             3.1. Common UWB Localization Schemes
                                  Due to its large bandwidth and nanosecond-level temporal resolution, UWB technol-
                             ogy enables localization schemes that are difficult to achieve with narrowband systems.
                             These are commonly classified into range-based (geometric) methods and fingerprinting-
                             based approaches, with hybrid configurations as an extension.
                                  Range-based (time-based) schemes estimate distances by exploiting precise time mea-
                             surements. The most common approaches are ToF and Two-Way Ranging (TWR), where
                             distance is derived from round-trip signal propagation. For large-scale deployments, TDoA
                             is widely adopted, as it allows high scalability at the cost of requiring tight synchronization
                             among anchors, as demonstrated in systems like uLoc [4]. Experimental studies have
                             shown that these methods can achieve centimeter-level precision in optimized scenarios [2].
                                  Angle-based schemes, such as Angle of Arrival (AoA) or Phase Difference of Arrival
                             (PDoA), estimate the direction of arrival using multi-antenna arrays. These techniques
                             enable localization with fewer anchors, including single-anchor configurations, although
                             they are sensitive to device orientation and hardware complexity [1,11].
                                  Fingerprinting-based schemes avoid explicit geometric modeling by mapping signal
                             features to locations. In UWB systems, fingerprinting typically exploits the rich structure of
                             the CIR rather than simple signal strength, which is particularly effective for direct position
                             estimation in complex environments [10].
                                  Finally, hybrid schemes combine multiple approaches, such as UWB with IMU sensors,
                             to improve robustness and maintain accuracy even in difficult NLoS conditions [5–7]. Most
                             ML-based methods reviewed in this paper aim to mitigate the limitations inherent to these
                             localization schemes [9].


                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                  8 of 56




                            3.2. UWB Signal Model and CIR
                                 UWB systems are characterized by the transmission of very short pulses with large
                            bandwidth, enabling fine temporal resolution of the propagation channel. The received
                            signal can be modeled as a superposition of delayed and attenuated replicas of the trans-
                            mitted pulse:
                                                                         K
                                                             r (t) = ∑ αk s(t − τk ) + n(t),                                   (1)
                                                                     k =1

                            where s(t) represents the transmitted pulse waveform, αk and τk denote the attenuation
                            and delay of the k-th multipath component, respectively, and n(t) represents additive white
                            Gaussian noise.
                                 The sampled CIR, h[n], provides rich information about multipath propagation and
                            constitutes the main physical observable exploited by UWB-based localization systems to
                            distinguish between the direct path and reflections.

                            3.3. UWB Ranging Principles
                                 Distance estimation in UWB systems is commonly based on the ToF of the transmitted
                            signal. Due to the lack of perfect clock synchronization between devices, TWR protocols
                            are widely adopted.
                                 In particular, Double-Sided Two-Way Ranging (DS-TWR), implemented in commercial
                            UWB transceivers such as the Decawave DW1000, mitigates clock drift by exchanging
                            multiple messages between the anchor and the tag. The propagation time is computed as:

                                                                  Tround1 Tround2 − Treply1 Treply2
                                                   Tprop =                                            ,                        (2)
                                                             Tround1 + Tround2 + Treply1 + Treply2

                            and the estimated distance is obtained as d = c Tprop , where c denotes the speed of light.

                            3.4. NLoS Error Modeling in UWB Systems
                                 In ideal LoS conditions, the measured distance closely matches the true Euclidean
                            distance. However, in indoor environments, NLoS conditions introduce a positive bias
                            due to signal obstruction and multipath propagation. The distance measurement can be
                            modeled as:                       
                                                                 true + e M ,
                                                              d                   LoS
                                                         d=                                                     (3)
                                                              dtrue + e M + e N , NLoS

                            where e M represents zero-mean measurement noise and e N denotes the NLoS-induced bias
                            (e N > 0), commonly modeled as a non-Gaussian random variable (e.g., exponential or
                            log-normal distribution).
                                 Accurate identification and mitigation of e N constitute one of the main challenges in
                            UWB indoor localization.

                            3.5. Position Estimation Algorithms
                                 Given distance estimates to N anchors with known coordinates pi , the position p
                            of the tag can be obtained by solving a multilateration problem. A common approach is
                            Weighted Least Squares (WLS), formulated as:

                                                                              N
                                                        p̂ = arg min ∑ wi (∥p − pi ∥ − di )2 ,                                 (4)
                                                                     p
                                                                             i =1




                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                 9 of 56




                            where the weights wi reflect the reliability of each range measurement. For mobile targets,
                            recursive Bayesian estimators such as the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) are often employed
                            to fuse temporal information and reduce noise.

                            3.6. ML for UWB Channel and Error Modeling
                                Recent approaches leverage ML to exploit the rich information contained in the UWB
                            channel impulse response. Instead of relying solely on threshold-based detectors, ML
                            models learn a nonlinear mapping:

                                                                  b̂NLoS = f θ (fCIR ),                                       (5)

                            where fCIR denotes features extracted from the CIR (e.g., delay spread, kurtosis, rise time,
                            or even raw samples), and f θ represents a trained model with parameters θ.
                                 The estimated bias can be used to correct range measurements or to adaptively weight
                            them in the position estimation stage, effectively integrating physical-layer channel model-
                            ing with data-driven inference.

                            4. Research Methodology
                                  This work is structured as a comprehensive review conducted using a systematic
                            methodology, following PRISMA (2020) guidelines [27] for the search, selection, and orga-
                            nization of the analyzed studies. To ensure methodological transparency and adherence to
                            international standards, the full PRISMA 2020 Checklist is provided as Supplementary Ma-
                            terials. Although the review draws inspiration from the PRISMA framework, the emphasis
                            is placed on integrating and interpreting the available research rather than applying a
                            strictly systematic protocol. The methodology includes the definition of research questions,
                            the formulation of database queries, the application of Inclusion Criteria (IC) and Exclusion
                            Criteria (EC), and the structured extraction of relevant information from each selected
                            study.
                                  The use of this structured approach is motivated by its clarity and reproducibility,
                            which help to ensure a consistent and transparent analysis of the literature. Following the
                            general principles of PRISMA, the review process included the main phases of identification,
                            screening, eligibility, and inclusion. This procedure helps to maintain transparency in the
                            search and selection of relevant works.
                                  In line with these steps, the process followed in this study can be summarized as follows:
                            1.   Definition of the Research Questions (RQs), to delimit the scope and objectives of
                                 the review.
                            2.   Specification of IC and EC, to decide whether a study is relevant for the analysis.
                            3.   Search in scientific databases (Scopus and Web of Science (WoS)) using advanced
                                 queries that combine key terms related to UWB, ML, and indoor positioning.
                            4.   Screening of the retrieved articles, removing duplicates and applying the IC and EC
                                 to titles, abstracts, and keywords, followed by a full-text review.
                            5.   Extraction and synthesis of information from the selected studies, organizing key as-
                                 pects such as publication year, ML tasks, algorithms, evaluation metrics, experimental
                                 setups, and reported results.
                                 Further details about the research questions and the IC/EC are provided in Sections 4.1
                            and 4.2. The overall selection process is also summarized using a PRISMA-inspired flow
                            diagram, which shows the number of records identified, screened, and finally included in
                            the review (see Section 4.4).




                                                                                      https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             10 of 56




                            4.1. Research Questions
                                  Defining clear research questions is an essential step in any comprehensive review, as
                            it helps to delimit the scope and objectives of the analysis. In this work, one Main Research
                            Question (MRQ) is proposed to address the topic at a general level, followed by several
                            specific RQs that guide the organization of information and the synthesis of results.

                            MRQ. How do ML algorithms contribute to UWB-based IPSs?
                            RQ1. What specific tasks or functions within the pipeline of UWB-based IPSs are addressed
                                through ML algorithms?
                            RQ2. Which ML algorithms are most commonly applied to these tasks, and what motiva-
                                tions or advantages are reported in the literature to justify their use?
                            RQ3. How are ML-based UWB positioning methods evaluated in terms of experimental
                                design, performance metrics, validation procedures, and reproducibility?
                            RQ4. What public datasets or benchmarks are available for combining UWB and ML, and
                                how are they used to improve the reproducibility and comparability of results?
                            RQ5. What are the main challenges, limitations, and open issues identified in applying
                                ML to UWB-based indoor positioning, and what directions for future research are
                                suggested?

                                  These research questions define the general structure of the review and are addressed
                            progressively throughout the analysis. Their answers are presented in Section 5 and
                            further discussed in Section 6, ensuring that they remain central to the interpretation of the
                            literature.

                            4.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
                                 To make sure that the studies considered in this review are relevant and reliable, a set
                            of IC and EC was defined. These criteria are consistent with the objectives of the review
                            and were applied during the screening and evaluation stages. This approach helped to
                            focus the analysis on studies that provide meaningful evidence of how ML is applied in
                            UWB-based IPSs, while excluding works with limited relevance to this topic.

                            IC1. The study must be a primary research article published in a peer-reviewed journal
                                 or conference proceedings. Secondary papers, such as reviews, surveys, or tutorials,
                                 were not considered.
                            IC2. The study must be written in English, as this review only includes articles available in
                                 that language.
                            IC3. The study must involve the use of UWB technology for indoor positioning and apply
                                 ML algorithms in a way that has a direct impact on the system’s performance.

                            EC1. Studies where UWB was not a central component for estimating positioning-related
                                 parameters, such as location, heading, tracking, NLoS mitigation, or coordinate-
                                 level fusion, were not included. Works in which UWB was used only marginally, in a
                                 comparative way, or for other purposes unrelated to indoor positioning (e.g., payment
                                 systems, door access, or in-vehicle navigation) were excluded.
                            EC2. Studies where the use of ML was only marginal were also excluded. For example,
                                 papers that applied ML only to auxiliary tasks without a meaningful impact on the
                                 positioning pipeline were not considered. Only studies where ML was directly used
                                 to process UWB data, such as for LoS/NLoS classification, ToF/TDoA estimation,
                                 filtering, bias correction, or anchor selection, or where ML replaced classical fusion
                                 methods (e.g., neural networks instead of EKF or Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF))
                                 were retained.


                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             11 of 56




                            EC3. Studies validated exclusively through simulations were not included. This review fo-
                                 cuses on works that include experiments carried out in real-world indoor environments.
                            EC4. Studies with experimental setups considered unrepresentative were excluded. This
                                 specifically refers to outdoor experiments, very small-scale areas (less than 10 m2 ),
                                 or static calibration boxes that lack the multipath complexity and dynamic NLoS
                                 conditions inherent to real-world operation. As these setups do not reflect the signal
                                 propagation challenges that ML models aim to address, only works performed in
                                 realistic and sufficiently complex indoor scenarios were considered.

                            4.3. Search Strategy
                                 The literature search was carried out in two major scientific databases, Scopus and
                            WoS, on 15 May 2025. The search was limited to publications from 2020 to 2024. These
                            databases were chosen because they offer broad coverage of engineering and computer
                            science fields, including IPSs, and are considered reliable sources for high-quality research.
                                 The search queries were designed to identify studies that combine UWB technology,
                            indoor positioning, and the use of ML techniques. Different keywords, synonyms, and
                            related expressions were used and connected through Boolean operators. Although the
                            syntax was adapted to each database, the overall logic and structure of the queries remained
                            consistent. The goal was to include as many relevant studies as possible and avoiding the
                            omission of important contributions. The final dataset was then refined by applying the IC
                            and EC defined earlier.

                            Scopus query:
                                       TITLE-ABS-KEY("ultra-wideband" OR "ultrawideband" OR "ultra wide band" OR
                                       "UWB")
                                       AND TITLE-ABS-KEY("indoor" OR "IPS")
                                       AND TITLE-ABS-KEY("loca*" OR "position*" OR "track*" OR "navig*" OR "CIR" OR
                                       "NLOS" OR "TOA" OR "TDOA" OR "TWR")
                                       AND TITLE-ABS-KEY("machine learning" OR "deep learning" OR "neural network*"
                                       OR "CNN" OR "LSTM" OR "transformer*" OR "GAN" OR "autoencoder" OR "SVM" OR
                                       "support vector machine" OR "random forest" OR "KNN" OR "k-nearest neighbor"
                                       OR "decision tree" OR "XGBoost" OR "gradient boosting" OR "clustering" OR
                                       "k-means" OR "Gaussian process*" OR "Bayesian network" OR "reinforcement
                                       learning")
                                       AND (LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR,2024) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR,2023) OR LIMIT-TO
                                       (PUBYEAR,2022) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR,2021) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR,2020))

                            Web of Science query:
                                       TS=("ultra-wideband" OR "ultrawideband" OR "ultra wide band" OR "UWB")
                                       AND TS=("indoor" OR "IPS")
                                       AND TS=("loca*" OR "position*" OR "track*" OR "navig*" OR "CIR" OR "NLOS" OR
                                       "TOA" OR "TDOA" OR "TWR")
                                       AND TS=("machine learning" OR "deep learning" OR "neural network*" OR "CNN"
                                       OR "LSTM" OR "transformer*" OR "GAN" OR "autoencoder" OR "SVM" OR "support
                                       vector machine" OR "random forest" OR "KNN" OR "k-nearest neighbor" OR
                                       "decision tree" OR "XGBoost" OR "gradient boosting" OR "clustering" OR
                                       "k-means" OR "Gaussian process*" OR "Bayesian network" OR "reinforcement
                                       learning")
                                       AND PY=(2020-2024)

                                  The initial search retrieved 399 records from Scopus and 289 from WoS, resulting in a
                            total of 688 entries. After removing 224 duplicates, 464 unique studies remained and were
                            considered for the screening stage.




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                                   12 of 56




                            4.4. Study Selection Process
                                 The study selection process was organized into four main stages—identification,
                            screening, eligibility, and inclusion—following the general structure of the PRISMA (2020)
                            framework. First, all records were collected from the selected databases and duplicates
                            were removed. Then, the IC and EC were applied in two steps. The first step consisted of
                            screening titles, abstracts, and keywords, while the second involved a full-text review to
                            identify the final set of studies included in the analysis. The overall process is summarized
                            in the PRISMA-inspired flow diagram shown below.
                                 From the initial retrieval, 399 records were obtained from Scopus and 289 from WoS,
                            giving a total of 688 documents. After removing 224 duplicates, 464 unique studies re-
                            mained for the screening stage.
                                 During the title and abstract screening, 165 records were excluded. Among these,
                            71 were not primary peer-reviewed publications (including 2 award summaries, 1 book,
                            38 conference reviews, 3 data papers, 13 theses, and 14 literature reviews). In addition,
                            25 studies were written in languages other than English, and 69 were unrelated to the use
                            of UWB and ML in indoor positioning. As a result, 299 studies were selected for full-text
                            examination. Of these, 10 reports could not be accessed due to institutional restrictions or
                            the absence of publicly available full-text versions. Therefore, 289 studies advanced to the
                            eligibility stage.
                                 At this stage, 119 additional papers were excluded according to the predefined criteria.
                            Specifically, 29 studies were removed because UWB was not a central component of the
                            positioning system (EC 1) and 41 because ML was used only marginally without direct
                            impact on the positioning pipeline (EC 2), 34 were based solely on simulations (EC 3), and
                            16 used experimental setups that were not representative of realistic indoor environments
                            (EC 4). In the end, 169 studies were included in this comprehensive review.
                                 The complete process is illustrated in the PRISMA (2020) flow diagram (Figure 2),
                            which shows the number of records identified, screened, excluded with reasons, assessed
                            for eligibility, and finally included in the review.

                                                            Identiﬁcation of new studies via databases and registers
                             Identiﬁcation




                                               Records identiﬁed from:
                                                 Databases (n = 2):                              Records removed before screening:
                                                  Scopus (n = 399)                                  Duplicate records (n = 224)
                                               Web of Science (n = 289)
                                                   Total (n = 688)




                                                                                                          Reports excluded:
                                                                                                            IC1 (n = 71)
                                                   Records screened
                                                                                                            IC2 (n = 25)
                                                      (n = 464)
                                                                                                            IC3 (n = 69)
                                                                                                           Total (n = 165)
                             Screening




                                              Reports sought for retrieval                              Reports not retrieved
                                                      (n = 299)                                               (n = 10)


                                                                                                          Reports excluded:
                                                                                                            EC1 (n = 29)
                                             Reports assessed for eligibility
                                                                                                            EC2 (n = 41)
                                                       (n = 289)
                                                                                                            EC3 (n = 34)
                                                                                                            EC4 (n = 16)
                                                                                                           Total (n = 119)
                             Included




                                             New studies included in review
                                                       (n = 169)




                            Figure 2. PRISMA 2020 flow diagram summarizing the study selection process.




                                                                                                                         https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             13 of 56




                            4.5. Data Extraction and Analysis
                                 After selecting the studies included in the review, the most relevant information from
                            each paper was collected and organized for analysis. The main goal of this stage was to
                            build a consistent dataset that could be used to classify and summarize the results in a clear
                            and structured way.
                                 For each study, several key characteristics considered essential for the analysis were
                            recorded. These include the following:
                            •    Bibliographic information, including the authors, year of publication, and the source
                                 where the study was published.
                            •    The specific task or function within the UWB-based IPS where ML algorithms were
                                 applied, for example in channel condition classification, ranging error correction, or
                                 direct position estimation.
                            •    ML algorithms used, specifying the type or family of models, including SVM, CNN,
                                 LSTM, Autoencoders (AEs), and ensemble methods, among others.
                            •    The evaluation metrics used to measure performance, for instance Root Mean Square
                                 Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), classification accuracy, F1-score, or com-
                                 putational time.
                            •    The experimental scenarios considered for validation, including environments such as
                                 laboratories, offices, industrial spaces, or in some cases, representative simulations.
                            •    The datasets employed, indicating whether the study used public, private, or ad hoc data
                                 collections, and describing their role in improving comparability and reproducibility.
                            •    The main reported results, especially those related to accuracy, robustness, error
                                 reduction, or improvements over baseline methods.
                                 All the extracted information was organized into summary tables and coded according
                            to the RQs defined in Section 4.1. The selected studies were also grouped by the main tasks
                            within the UWB positioning pipeline, which made it possible to analyze how different
                            types of ML algorithms contributed in each context.
                                 The analysis of the collected data was conducted on two complementary levels:
                            1.   A descriptive analysis, focused on quantifying several aspects such as the yearly
                                 distribution of publications, the frequency of use of each algorithm, the proportion of
                                 studies addressing each task, and the most common evaluation metrics.
                            2.   A qualitative analysis, aimed at comparing the reported results, identifying perfor-
                                 mance trends across tasks and algorithms, and discussing the main challenges and
                                 recent directions in applying ML to UWB-based indoor positioning.

                            5. Results
                                 The results are presented according to the five RQs outlined in Section 4.1.

                            5.1. Overview of Included Studies
                                 A total of 169 primary studies were identified through the PRISMA selection process
                            detailed in Section 4. Figure 2 presents the complete flow diagram of record identification
                            and screening.
                                 The temporal distribution of the included studies is summarized in Figure 3. The data
                            indicate a marked upward trend in publication activity. After a brief dip in 2021, the yearly
                            output increased from 20 to 54 papers by 2024, corresponding to a compound growth of
                            nearly 170%.
                                 In terms of publication type, the review comprises 104 journal articles (61.5%) and
                            65 conference papers (38.5%). While early contributions were evenly distributed, journal
                            publications have become predominant, representing more than 70% of all studies in 2024.



                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                                             14 of 56




                            This progression suggests a maturation of the research field, as initial exploratory findings
                            presented at conferences have evolved into more comprehensive and rigorously validated
                            journal articles.
                                 This overview provides the contextual foundation for the analytical discussion of the
                            research questions presented in the following sections.


                                                                       Type        Conference       Journal


                                                                                                                               53

                                                 50
                                                                                                               47
                                                                                                                              28.3%


                                                 40
                             Number of studies




                                                                                       35                     42.6%



                                                 30
                                                                                      45.7%


                                                      20
                                                 20                                                                           71.7%
                                                      35%        14
                                                                                                              57.4%

                                                 10              50%
                                                                                      54.3%
                                                      65%
                                                                 50%

                                                 0
                                                      2020      2021                  2022                    2023            2024
                                                                                      Year


                            Figure 3. Annual distribution of the 169 included studies by publication type. The figure shows the
                            accelerated growth of the field and the increasing predominance of journal articles in recent years,
                            reflecting the topic’s overall maturation.

                            5.2. RQ1. What Specific Tasks or Functions Within the Pipeline of UWB-Based Indoor Positioning
                            Systems Are Addressed Through ML Algorithms?
                                 Building on this general overview, the following sections examine in detail how ML
                            contributes to specific functions within UWB-based positioning pipelines. To contextualize
                            the role of ML, Figure 4 presents the classical pipeline used in UWB-based IPSs. This base-
                            line architecture follows a deterministic flow that includes signal measurement (e.g., ToF
                            or TDoA), range or angle estimation, geometric localization (e.g., multilateration or tri-
                            angulation), and optional filtering through Kalman or particle filters. No learning-based
                            adaptation is incorporated in this model, and all stages rely on fixed propagation assump-
                            tions, typically LoS conditions. In contrast, modern systems increasingly incorporate ML
                            modules to enhance specific components of this pipeline, intervening at different stages,
                            from early signal preprocessing to final coordinate estimation.

                                                             Signal measurement                                         Position computation   Tracking / smoothing
                             UWB anchors and mobile tag                                  Distance / angle estimation
                                                               (raw timing data)                                         (geometric solver)         (optional)



                            Figure 4. Baseline UWB positioning pipeline. Input dimensionality corresponds to scalar measure-
                            ments d ∈ R (e.g., ToF or TDoA), while the output corresponds to estimated spatial coordinates
                            p ∈ R2 or R3 (representing 2D or 3D positions).

                                  The application of ML within UWB-based IPSs is distributed across multiple functional
                            stages of the positioning pipeline. Based on the analysis of 169 primary studies, a total
                            of 199 instances were identified in which ML algorithms were employed to support or
                            enhance specific components of the system. Multiple functional assignments may occur
                            within a single study when different ML modules operate at separate stages of the pipeline.
                                  Figure 5 presents the distribution of these applications across six functional stages.
                            The most frequently targeted functional tasks are channel condition classification (83 occur-
                            rences) and ranging error mitigation (60), which are often combined to improve the reliabil-
                            ity of distance measurements under multipath and NLoS conditions. Position estimation is


                                                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                          15 of 56




                            addressed in 39 studies, covering both direct regression methods and fingerprinting-based
                            localization. The high prevalence of classification and error mitigation tasks (together
                            accounting for 143 of the 199 assignments) highlights that ML is currently perceived pri-
                            marily as a robust compensator for physical layer impairments rather than a standalone
                            replacement for geometric positioning.


                                   Channel condition
                                       classification
                                                                                                        83


                                       Ranging error
                                          mitigation
                                                                                           60



                                  Position estimation                          39


                                  Channel parameter
                                          estimation
                                                                    9


                               Signal preprocessing
                               and feature extraction
                                                                7


                             Sequential Tracking and
                                trajectory estimation
                                                            1


                                                        0               25          50            75
                                                                             Occurrences


                            Figure 5. Distribution of the 199 functional assignments across the six stages of the UWB pipeline
                            where ML techniques are applied. Multiple assignments can occur within a single study.

                                  Less common applications include channel parameter estimation (9) and signal pre-
                            processing and feature extraction (7). Only a single study addresses tracking and trajectory
                            estimation, representing systems that explicitly model temporal evolution across consecu-
                            tive UWB measurements.
                                  Multimodal fusion approaches (e.g., UWB+vision or UWB+IMU) were included
                            within the broader category of direct estimation, since the ML models in these systems
                            operate directly on heterogeneous inputs, including UWB measurements, to infer position.
                            In this taxonomy, fusion is therefore treated as an architectural variant of direct estimation
                            rather than as a separate functional stage.
                                  While Figure 5 quantifies how ML contributes to distinct functional tasks within the
                            UWB positioning pipeline, these assignments often appear together within a single system.
                            To capture how such tasks are integrated architecturally, the following analysis introduces
                            a set of representative ML-enhanced pipelines (a–f). These pipelines correspond not to
                            isolated tasks, but rather to common structural patterns in how ML modules are inserted
                            within or replace specific components of the overall positioning pipeline. Figure 6 illustrates
                            these representative pipelines.
                                  To ensure a clear and consistent classification, pipelines are grouped according to
                            the functional role and direct output of the ML module, rather than the overall system
                            architecture. Specifically, category (a) includes systems where ML corrects raw UWB
                            measurements (e.g., ranges or CIR) but leaves the position estimation to a traditional
                            geometric solver. Category (b) comprises fusion models where ML integrates UWB data
                            with additional sources (e.g., IMU, vision) to produce a joint position estimate. Category (c)
                            is assigned to fingerprinting architectures that match UWB features to reference positions in
                            a pre-constructed radio map. In contrast, (d) corresponds to models that learn a continuous
                            mapping from raw UWB input to absolute coordinates, without predefined references
                            or maps. Pipelines in (e) involve ML models that estimate intermediate propagation
                            parameters (e.g., AoA, Time of Arrival (ToA)) rather than positions themselves. These
                            parameters are subsequently used by geometric solvers for final localization. Finally,


                                                                                                https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             16 of 56




                            (f) covers models that learn motion dynamics or time dependencies from sequential UWB
                            data to refine the trajectory across multiple measurements. This taxonomy emphasizes the
                            functional role and output of the ML module, ensuring mutually exclusive classification.
                            (a) Channel assessment and ranging correction: This pipeline enhances traditional geo-
                                metric localization through the insertion of ML modules for signal assessment and
                                correction. The learning model operates on ranging and CIR data to classify the chan-
                                nel condition (LoS/NLoS) and to predict or mitigate the ranging bias. The corrected
                                distances are then used by conventional solvers such as WLS or lateration to estimate
                                the final position [8,11,28–96].
                            (b) UWB + IMU/vision sensor fusion: In this configuration, ML performs multisensor
                                fusion, combining information from heterogeneous sources, typically UWB, inertial,
                                or vision-based sensors, to obtain a unified position estimate. Bias correction may
                                be incorporated as an optional intermediate step, while the final network output
                                represents the fused position directly [7,97–105].
                            (c) UWB fingerprinting localization: This architecture replaces the geometric solver with
                                a data-driven mapping between signal observations and a discrete set of reference
                                locations. An offline radio map is first constructed from UWB features (e.g., CIR, RSS,
                                ToF), and the ML model is trained to associate each fingerprint with its corresponding
                                position. During online operation, the live input is matched to the most similar
                                fingerprints and the final coordinates are obtained by classification or regression over
                                this discrete set of reference points [9,106–108].
                            (d) Direct DL-based estimation: In contrast to fingerprinting, these pipelines learn a
                                continuous mapping from raw or minimally processed inputs (e.g., CIR, ranges,
                                images) directly to spatial coordinates or joint outputs such as position and NLoS
                                class. No explicit radio map or geometric solver is maintained. Typical architectures
                                include CNNs, LSTMs, and attention-based models that perform direct position
                                regression from high-dimensional input data to ( x, y, z) or to combined position/NLoS
                                labels [109–136].
                            (e) Channel parameter estimation: In this configuration, ML modules infer intermediate
                                propagation descriptors (e.g., AoA, TDoA, ToA, or amplitude) rather than predicting
                                the final position. These learned parameters are then consumed by conventional geo-
                                metric solvers, which perform multilateration or hybrid localization. Representative
                                examples include [10,137–144].
                            (f) Sequential tracking and trajectory estimation: This pipeline focuses on modeling
                                temporal evolution across consecutive UWB measurements. Here, ML learns mo-
                                tion patterns or state transitions, complementing instantaneous position estimates
                                produced by traditional or learning-based localization modules. The tracking layer
                                refines successive estimates into coherent trajectories [145].
                                  Pipelines (a)–(d) represent the most frequently observed patterns, while (e) and (f)
                            illustrate less common but functionally relevant stages. Rather than a rigid taxonomy, these
                            configurations serve as analytical references for the specific ML algorithms discussed in
                            the remainder of this section. It is important to note that the functional tasks analyzed
                            next act as modular components (represented by the blue blocks in Figure 6) that can
                            be integrated flexibly across different architectures; for instance, a channel classification
                            module is typically found in pipeline (a), but can also serve as an auxiliary input in fusion
                            frameworks like (b).




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 of 56




   (a) Channel Condition Classification and Ranging Error Mitigation




    UWB range or CIR            Signal Preprocessing and                Channel Condition Classification                    Ranging Error Mitigation              Weighted geometric solver
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Final Position
    (single snapshot)              Features Extraction                     (ML-based LOS / NLOS)                             (ML-based correction)                   (Lateration / WLS)




   (b) UWB + Auxiliary Sensor Fusion (IMU / Vision)


    UWB range or CIR

                                                                            Signal Preprocessing and                                             Position Estimation
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Final Position
                                                                               Features Extraction                                                (Sensor Fusion)
      Auxiliar Sensor
       (IMU / Vision)


   (c) Fingerprint-based Position Estimation                                                                                            (d) Direct Position Estimation (Deep Learning)


      Offline radio-map
     (UWB fingerprints)
                                                            Position Estimation                                                        UWB range or CIR                Direct Position Estimation
                                                                                                           Final Position                                                                                 Final Position
                                                           (Fingerprint matching)                                                        (raw input)                      (ML / DL regression)
     Online UWB signal
       (CIR or RSS)



   (e) ML-based Channel Parameter Estimation (AoA / ToA)                                                                              (f) Sequential Tracking and Trajectory Estimation



         Raw CIR              Channel Parameter Estimation                                                                                Sequential CIRs              Sequential Trajectory Estimation   Reconstructed
                                                                       Geometric solver (non-ML)             Final Position
      (unprocessed)              (ML-based AoA / ToA)                                                                                      (time series)                (ML-based time-series model)        Trajectory




                                                        Figure 6. Representative ML-enhanced UWB positioning pipelines (a–f). Blue blocks indicate
                                                        learning-based components, while gray and white blocks represent input sources and conven-
                                                        tional modules, respectively. Input dimensionality varies: correction/fusion pipelines (a,b) process
                                                        scalars d ∈ R, whereas DL/fingerprinting models (c–e) process raw CIR vectors h ∈ R N (typically
                                                        64 ≤ N ≤ 1016). Outputs range from discrete class labels y ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K } (for binary or multiclass
                                                        tasks) to position estimates p ∈ R2 or R3 .

                                                        5.2.1. Signal Preprocessing and Feature Extraction
                                                              Signal preprocessing constitutes the initial stage of the UWB positioning pipeline.
                                                        It focuses on preparing raw measurements, such as the CIR or range estimates, before
                                                        subsequent processing steps like classification, ranging correction, or position estimation.
                                                        The objective is to improve data reliability by suppressing noise, reducing variability, and
                                                        enhancing measurement consistency under NLoS or multipath conditions.

                                                        Waveform denoising and signal stabilization: Several contributions implement techniques
                                                            to suppress transient distortions in the CIR, aiming to produce cleaner and more con-
                                                            sistent waveforms for subsequent processing. This includes methods that reduce high-
                                                            frequency components and mitigate the effects of multipath interference, especially in
                                                            highly reflective or cluttered indoor environments [28,146].
                                                        Filtering of outliers and irregular samples: In some systems, signal filtering is performed
                                                              through clustering-based mechanisms that group similar observations and discard
                                                              inconsistent measurements. This step enhances data quality before position estima-
                                                              tion or trajectory inference, particularly in tracking scenarios with multiple targets or
                                                              noisy reflections [29,147,148].
                                                        Data augmentation and domain expansion: A subset of studies generates synthetic data
                                                             to improve dataset diversity and coverage. This includes the creation of additional
                                                             samples for underrepresented propagation conditions, or the simulation of target-
                                                             domain scenarios when real data are scarce. Augmented datasets are later used in
                                                             channel classification, ranging correction, or localization modules [48,149].




                                                                                                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             18 of 56




                                 In total, seven studies implement signal preprocessing or augmentation techniques
                            within the UWB positioning pipeline. These mechanisms contribute to improve the reliabil-
                            ity of downstream modules by producing structured, filtered, or enriched input data.

                            5.2.2. Channel Condition Classification
                                 This functional category includes systems that infer the propagation condition of UWB
                            links, identifying whether a signal is affected by LoS obstruction, multipath interference, or
                            other types of channel degradation. Within the positioning pipeline, this stage typically
                            follows signal acquisition or preprocessing and provides channel-state information that
                            supports ranging error mitigation, measurement selection, or sensor fusion. A total of
                            83 studies implement classification mechanisms at this stage.

                            Binary Classification of Channel Conditions: The majority of the contributions (53) im-
                                 plement binary classification schemes, which distinguish between LoS and NLoS
                                 conditions. In these systems, the classification output serves as a filtering mechanism
                                 to identify potentially biased measurements. Common uses include triggering NLoS
                                 corrections, assigning measurement weights, or excluding unreliable ranges from
                                 geometric localization. In several cases, binary classification is combined with proba-
                                 bility estimation, allowing subsequent modules to integrate confidence scores into
                                 weighting functions or filtering processes. This enables a more flexible adaptation
                                 of positioning algorithms based on the estimated channel reliability [7,8,30–32,35,37–
                                 43,46,49,53,54,59–62,64,68,81,88,96–98,149–172].
                            Multiclass and Context-Aware Classification: In contrast to binary schemes, a subset of
                                 systems (30) implement multiclass or context-aware classification. These systems
                                 differentiate between various NLoS conditions (e.g., soft-NLoS, hard-NLoS), or clas-
                                 sify specific environmental obstructions such as walls, human bodies, glass, or metal.
                                 Some works also use classification to identify subregions of the environment, device
                                 placement positions, or different signal degradation contexts. This refined classifi-
                                 cation is used to support advanced correction strategies, spatial segmentation, or
                                 dynamic adaptation of positioning algorithms in complex indoor scenarios. This
                                 approach is particularly relevant in applications requiring fine-grained environmental
                                 awareness or robustness under heterogeneous propagation conditions. Represen-
                                 tative studies include [33,36,44,45,47,48,51,52,55,58,63,79,84,88,90,96,107,108,117,149,
                                 173–181].

                            5.2.3. Ranging Error Mitigation
                                This functional task refers to the use of learning-based mechanisms to reduce or
                            compensate for distortions in the estimated distances between UWB anchors and tags.
                            These distortions, typically caused by multipath propagation, NLoS conditions, body
                            shadowing, signal obstruction, or tag orientation, introduce significant bias in time-based
                            ranging methods such as ToF, TDoA, or DS-TWR. A total of sixty studies were classified
                            under this task.

                            Direct Bias Correction: These studies correct deterministic range errors caused by known
                                 factors such as static bias, hardware imperfections, or fixed environmental effects.
                                 The models estimate corrected distances directly from the raw measurements before
                                 geometric localization. This group includes [6,28,39,44,57,67,69,72,73,75–77,86,88,92,
                                 94,111,127,182].
                            Context-Aware Mitigation: In these systems, bias correction adapts dynamically to envi-
                                 ronmental or channel conditions. Contextual variables such as CIR features, signal



                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                               19 of 56




                                  strength, or channel classification are used to estimate the severity of NLoS or multi-
                                  path effects. Representative works include [46,63,64,66,70,71,74,79,82,84,85,89,90,93,
                                  95,108,127,140,142,167].
                            Fusion-Integrated Correction: This category involves systems where the range correction
                                 is embedded into sensor fusion, filtering, or pose estimation processes. Instead of
                                 correcting distances in isolation, these approaches jointly optimize with modules
                                 such as EKF, factor graphs, or trajectory models. Studies in this group include
                                 [34,36,65,75,83,100–104,107,183].

                            5.2.4. Channel Parameter Estimation
                                  This functional stage refers to the extraction of physical propagation parameters
                            from UWB signals prior to coordinate estimation. These descriptors provide intermediate
                            information about the geometry and quality of the radio channel, enabling downstream
                            tasks such as hybrid localization, geometric multilateration, or multipath exploitation.
                                  A total of nine studies were classified in this category. Their objective is not to estimate
                            the final position of the target, but to infer parameters such as AoA, PDoA, ToA, TDoA, or
                            signal amplitude, which are later consumed by non-ML modules for position computation.

                            Angle-based Estimation (AoA, PDoA): Several contributions target the estimation of di-
                                rectional parameters that characterize the angle at which the signal arrives at the
                                receiver. These include the prediction of AoA from CIR amplitude and phase profiles
                                using DL modules [137,138], and the modeling of PDoA distributions to resolve
                                phase ambiguity prior to tracking [143].
                            Timing-based Estimation (ToA, TDoA): Another set of works focuses on the estimation of
                                 signal propagation times, such as ToA or TDoA. These parameters replace traditional
                                 estimators (e.g., peak detectors or Leading-Edge Detection (LDE)), a classical method
                                 for identifying the first significant path arrival in UWB signals, with learning-based
                                 inference from the CIR [10,141,144].
                            Joint Estimation of Multiple Parameters: Some approaches infer several channel descrip-
                                  tors simultaneously, enabling a more complete geometric modeling of multipath
                                  propagation. These include combinations of distance, angle, and time informa-
                                  tion [140,142].
                            Amplitude-based Characterization: One study predicts the amplitude and Signal-to-
                                Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) of dominant multipath components, producing
                                a fine-grained power profile of the UWB channel for later use in localization algo-
                                rithms [139].

                                 In summary, this stage represents the process of extracting geometric and physical
                            channel features from raw UWB data, which are subsequently leveraged for position
                            estimation or correction tasks in other pipeline stages.

                            5.2.5. Position Estimation
                                 This functional category represents the final stage of the UWB-based positioning
                            pipeline, where spatial coordinates are obtained or refined based on previously processed
                            signal measurements. A total of 39 studies were assigned to this category.

                            Direct position estimation: Most systems compute coordinates directly from UWB-derived
                                 inputs, such as distances, CIR features, or ToF values, bypassing explicit multilatera-
                                 tion. These models learn non-linear mappings from signal features to final ( x, y, z)
                                 coordinates through direct position regression. Some methods rely solely on static
                                 input [33,105,109–111,115,119,123–125,130–132,135,136,184], while others incorporate


                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                               20 of 56




                                  temporal or spatial–temporal dependencies to improve prediction in dynamic scenar-
                                  ios, including motion-aware or multi-tag setups [99,112,113,120,122,129].
                            Position calibration and correction: A subset of studies applies correction over previously
                                  estimated positions, refining ( x, y) or ( x, y, z) outputs to reduce residual error caused
                                  by anchor misplacement, NLoS effects, or model limitations. This includes both
                                  classical lateration systems and commercial IPS platforms, with correction strategies
                                  applied via regression over initial coordinates [114,116,126,127,133,185].
                            Fingerprinting-based localization: Other contributions use fingerprinting techniques,
                                 training models to associate input features (e.g., CIR, RSS, ToF) with previously
                                 labeled reference points. These systems infer position by regression or similar-
                                 ity matching against stored fingerprints. This group includes both UWB-only ap-
                                 proaches [9,106,128,134,141] and multi-technology systems combining additional
                                 sensors such as Wi-Fi or magnetometers [118,186,187].

                                In all these systems, the ML component is applied directly to infer or adjust spatial
                            coordinates, completing the positioning pipeline with a final coordinate output.

                            5.2.6. Sequential Tracking and Trajectory Estimation
                                  While not present in most conventional UWB positioning pipelines, this additional stage
                            captures the temporal dynamics of user motion across consecutive signal measurements.
                                  Only one study was identified under this functional task [145]. It proposed a device-
                            free indoor tracking method that infers user movement by analyzing variations in the CIR
                            over time. The system classifies movement patterns, combining position and direction,
                            across a predefined set of trajectories. These sequences are then refined using a path-
                            finding algorithm that accounts for environmental structure and motion continuity, yielding
                            complete trajectory reconstructions.
                                  Importantly, this pipeline operates without wearable tags, relying solely on UWB
                            signal reflections. It represents a distinct approach to UWB-based positioning, focused on
                            dynamic tracking rather than instantaneous location estimation.
                                  Overall, these four pipelines summarize the principal ways in which ML has been
                            integrated into UWB-based positioning, either as an auxiliary component for signal cor-
                            rection or as a complete data-driven estimator of position. This classification provides the
                            structural basis for the analysis of algorithmic choices and performance outcomes in RQ2
                            and RQ3.

                            5.3. RQ2. Which ML Algorithms Are Most Commonly Applied to These Tasks, and What
                            Motivations or Advantages Are Reported in the Literature to Justify Their Use?
                                 Based on the functional taxonomy established in Section 5.2, the analysis in RQ2
                            focuses on the specific ML models employed within each stage of the UWB positioning
                            pipeline. A total of 199 assignments were identified across six functional categories, in-
                            cluding signal preprocessing, channel classification, ranging error mitigation, channel
                            parameter estimation, position estimation, and sequential tracking.
                                 For each category, the types of ML models used, their frequency of occurrence, and
                            representative architectural patterns are reported. The results are presented in a stage-
                            wise manner, with one subsection per functional category. In each case, a summary table
                            enumerates the distinct models applied, along with study references.

                            5.3.1. Technical Motivation and Limitations of ML Models for UWB Positioning
                                 The prominence of specific ML architectures in the reviewed literature is grounded in
                            their theoretical alignment with the physical properties of UWB signals. Before analyzing



                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             21 of 56




                            their application in specific pipeline stages, this subsection outlines why these models are
                            particularly effective for processing CIR data and handling propagation challenges.
                                  The selection of ML models in UWB-based IPS is fundamentally driven by the physical
                            characteristics of the radio channel and the structure of the CIR. The CIR acts as a location-
                            dependent fingerprint of the environment, where LoS conditions concentrate energy in the
                            first path, while NLoS scenarios introduce delayed multipath components and non-linear
                            ranging biases. Traditional analytical models struggle to capture these effects, which has
                            motivated the widespread adoption of data-driven approaches in the literature.
                                  CNNs are particularly effective for CIR-based processing due to their inductive bias
                            toward locality and translation invariance. Multipath effects manifest as local peak patterns
                            and energy distributions within the CIR that may shift in time due to distance variations
                            or clock jitter. CNNs can detect such patterns independently of their absolute position,
                            enabling robust extraction of multipath signatures directly from raw CIR data without
                            handcrafted feature engineering [31,162]. Furthermore, recent approaches extend this
                            principle by transforming 1D CIR signals into 2D time–frequency images (e.g., using
                            Gramian Angular Fields), allowing the exploitation of vision-based architectures [79].
                                  Temporal models such as LSTM, Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), and Temporal Convo-
                            lutional Network (TCN) exploit the temporal coherence of both user motion and channel
                            conditions. In realistic deployments, NLoS states and ranging errors exhibit strong tem-
                            poral persistence, which sequential models can leverage to smooth position estimates,
                            compensate for intermittent signal blockages, and improve tracking robustness compared
                            to snapshot-based methods [113,120].
                                  Classical ML models, including SVMs and RF, remain relevant when operating on
                            low-dimensional UWB features (e.g., ToF, RSS, First-Path (FP) energy). Their margin
                            maximization, robustness to small datasets, and low computational complexity explain
                            their historical success in LoS/NLoS classification and bias mitigation tasks, particularly in
                            embedded scenarios where DL deployment is constrained [44,52].
                                  Despite their effectiveness, the reviewed studies consistently report significant limi-
                            tations for ML-based UWB positioning methods. In particular, deep models often exhibit
                            poor generalization across environments due to non-stationary CIR statistics and hardware-
                            dependent signal distributions. Performance degradation is commonly observed when
                            models trained in one environment or device configuration are deployed in another, as
                            documented by Fontaine et al. [96] and Hua et al. [166]. Furthermore, several studies note
                            that high computational costs hinder scalability on resource-constrained devices, frequently
                            motivating the adoption of domain adaptation strategies or lightweight model designs.

                            5.3.2. Signal Preprocessing and Feature Extraction
                                 In this initial stage of the UWB positioning pipeline, ML techniques are employed to
                            clean, organize, or enrich raw measurements prior to downstream processing. Seven studies
                            employed such models to support signal denoising, clustering-based filtering, or synthetic
                            data generation, aiming to improve robustness under multipath and NLoS conditions.

                            Clustering-based methods: Unsupervised clustering, particularly using density-based
                                 algorithms, was applied to isolate reliable measurements and remove outliers from
                                 CIR data. These approaches were primarily integrated in passive tracking or radar-
                                 inspired UWB systems, where noisy reflections or overlapping trajectories required
                                 filtering before range or position estimation [29,147,148].
                            AE-based and transformer-based denoising: Deep neural architectures were explored to
                                suppress signal noise and enhance temporal consistency in CIR measurements. Varia-
                                tional and denoising AEs were used for waveform reconstruction and latent feature



                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                        22 of 56




                                   extraction from raw UWB signals [28], whereas transformer-based networks incor-
                                   porated attention mechanisms to emphasize relevant temporal components under
                                   varying propagation conditions [146].
                            Generative models for data augmentation: Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
                                were employed to expand training datasets by synthesizing realistic CIR samples, par-
                                ticularly in scenarios with class imbalance or limited measurement diversity. These
                                models were often coupled with Transfer Learning (TL) or feature-based classification
                                pipelines to enhance downstream channel-condition identification [48,149].

                                 As summarized in Table 3, clustering-based and AE-based approaches remain the most
                            frequently adopted in this functional block, while generative and transformer-based models
                            have recently emerged to improve data diversity and temporal feature representation.

                            Table 3. ML models applied to Signal Preprocessing and Feature Extraction. Each occurrence
                            corresponds to a distinct model used within this functional category.

                                ML Model                                                          Occurrences            References
                                Clustering-Based Methods                                                    3           [29,147,148]
                                Autoencoder                                                             2                  [28,48]
                                GAN (Generative Adversarial Network)                                    2                 [48,149]
                                Transformer-Based Model                                             1                       [146]

                            Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.



                            5.3.3. Channel Condition Classification
                                 This functional stage encompasses 83 studies that employ ML models to distinguish
                            LoS from NLoS conditions, or to identify specific propagation contexts such as multipath
                            interference, dynamic obstructions, or environmental categories. As summarized in Table 4,
                            a broad variety of learning paradigms has been explored, with CNNs being by far the most
                            prevalent approach.

                            Table 4. ML models applied to Channel Condition Classification. Each occurrence corresponds to a
                            distinct model used within this functional category.

 ML Model                               Occurrences                                         References
                                                             [30,31,37,38,43,45,47,49,50,53,55,56,59,60,67,79,85,90,96,150,152,154,
 Convolutional Neural Network                         35
                                                                     155,157,159,160,162,165,169,172,174,177,178,180,188]
 Support Vector Machine                          21           [7,32,34,42–44,46,48,51,52,61,81,84,98,149,156,164,170,172,173,176]
 Random Forest                              9                                  [35,44,52,108,151,153,170,172,176]
 Long Short-Term Memory Network             10                                [47,58,67,85,90,150,156,172,180,188]
 Deep Neural Network                        9                                   [8,62,68,96,117,158,161,166,175]
 k-Nearest Neighbors                       7                                       [44,61,107,152,164,170,172]
 Decision Tree                            5                                            [51,62,156,176,179]
 Ensemble Methods                         5                                             [39,44,63,88,172]
 Multilayer Perceptron                     6                                          [50,52,61,81,164,177]
 Naïve Bayes                              4                                                [40,41,44,168]
 XGBoost                                  4                                              [64,163,164,176]
 Recurrent Neural Network                 4                                               [49,55,171,178]
 Variational Autoencoder                 3                                                   [33,36,171]
 Transformer-Based Models                3                                                  [54,167,181]
 Gaussian Mixture Model                  2                                                     [97,151]
 Clustering-Based Methods                1                                                       [156]
 Other Methods                           1                                                       [170]

                            Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.




                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                            23 of 56




                            Convolutional architectures and variants: CNN-based models dominate this functional
                                block, appearing in 35 studies. Standard feedforward and convolutional structures are
                                widely used for binary LoS/NLoS discrimination [8,96], while deeper variants such
                                as Residual Network (ResNet) [31,154], Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [37,162],
                                and TCN [56,160] enable hierarchical or temporal feature extraction. Attention-
                                enhanced CNNs further refine signal representations by focusing on dominant multi-
                                path components [55,180]. Several architectures combine convolutional blocks with
                                recurrent units such as LSTM or Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BiLSTM) for
                                sequential modeling [51,85], while others integrate specialized designs like Hybrid
                                Quantum Convolutional Neural Network (HQCNN) for nonlinear feature embed-
                                ding [41,59].
                            SVMs and ensemble classifiers: SVMs constitute the second most frequent algorithm (21
                               occurrences), applied both as standalone classifiers [42,173] and as components of
                               hybrid or comparative frameworks. In several studies, SVMs are combined with data
                               preprocessing modules such as AEs or GANs [48,149], or are evaluated alongside
                               tree-based ensembles including RF and gradient-boosting models such as Extreme
                               Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) [44,170,176]. These combinations aim to improve gen-
                               eralization under diverse propagation scenarios and address class imbalance issues.
                            Recurrent and attention-based networks: Temporal learning mechanisms are also repre-
                                 sented by recurrent neural architectures, particularly LSTM units, which model se-
                                 quential dependencies in the CIR. They are frequently integrated with convolutional
                                 encoders [58,90,150] or extended via GRU and attention-based modules [67,180].
                                Transformer-based classifiers are less common but introduce novel attention-driven
                                 strategies such as Domain Adaptation (DA) [181] and Bidirectional Encoder Represen-
                                 tations from Transformers (BERT)-style encoding for NLoS pattern recognition [167].
                            Alternative and emerging models: Other learning strategies include Multilayer Percep-
                                 trons (MLPs) [50,177], decision-tree variants [179], Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [151],
                                 and boosting methods such as XGBoost and Light Gradient Boosting Machine
                                 (LightGBM) [64,163]. AEs and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are occasionally
                                 adopted for feature learning and anomaly detection [33,36]. More specialized formula-
                                 tions include Variational Recurrent Neural Network (VRNN) [171] and HQCNN [41].
                                 Clustering-based classifiers and probabilistic models such as Naïve Bayes appear as
                                 auxiliary components within hybrid or comparative pipelines [156,168].

                                 Overall, this stage exhibits the highest architectural diversity within the UWB learning
                            pipeline. Convolutional and recurrent architectures remain dominant for feature-rich signal
                            modeling, while ensemble and boosting techniques provide interpretable and computa-
                            tionally efficient alternatives for deployment on resource-limited hardware.

                            5.3.4. Ranging Error Mitigation
                                 This functional stage encompasses 60 studies that employ ML models to mitigate
                            or compensate ranging errors in UWB systems. These errors, typically caused by NLoS
                            propagation, multipath interference, tag orientation, or device heterogeneity, introduce
                            systematic biases that degrade distance and position accuracy. As summarized in Table 5,
                            a diverse set of models has been proposed for bias estimation, including deep neural
                            networks, probabilistic formulations, and clustering-based corrections.




                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                          24 of 56




                               Table 5. ML models applied to Ranging Error Mitigation. Each occurrence corresponds to a distinct
                               model used within this functional category.

                    ML Model                  Occurrences                                       References
 Convolutional Neural Network                      15                     [6,28,46,67,71,74,79,82,85,88,93,96,127,182,189]
 Long Short-Term Memory Network                   12                           [6,58,67,69,83,85,86,92,93,103,104,127]
 Deep Neural Network                              10                              [6,11,63,87,91,96,102,111,144,183]
 Autoencoder                                    6                                       [28,36,83,103,140,142]
 Gaussian Mixture Model                         5                                          [70,78,89,95,100]
 SVM/SVR                                        4                                            [34,73,81,84]
 k-Nearest Neighbors                           3                                             [76,107,190]
 Clustering-Based Methods                      3                                              [65,66,101]
 Random Forest                                 3                                              [44,80,108]
 Ensemble Methods                              3                                               [44,75,88]
 Gaussian Models                               2                                                 [67,94]
 Multilayer Perceptron                         2                                                 [81,90]
 Transformer-Based Models                      2                                               [127,167]
 Recurrent Neural Network                      2                                                 [86,93]
 Decision Tree                                 1                                                   [39]
 XGBoost                                       1                                                   [11]
 Other Models                                   5                                          [57,64,72,77,140]

                               Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.



                               Convolutional and recurrent neural networks: CNNs represent the most widely adopted
                                   model at this stage, appearing in 14 studies. Many works apply CNNs directly to CIR
                                   data for bias regression, using compact implementations such as Residual Enhance-
                                   ment Multiscale Network (REMNet) [71,74] or deeper hybrid designs incorporating
                                   ResNet modules [79]. Temporal variants couple CNN encoders with LSTM units
                                   to model the time-varying dynamics of ranging bias [85,127], and some integrate
                                   additional recurrent layers such as GRU or Transformer-based attention modules [93].
                                   LSTM architectures alone, reported in 12 studies, learn sequential error dependencies
                                   or predict time-evolving NLoS biases directly from CIR or ToF sequences [6,69,92].
                               AEs and generative models: AE-based models are employed in this stage to directly es-
                                    timate or compensate the systematic bias present in UWB range measurements.
                                    Rather than acting solely as denoising modules, these networks learn a mapping
                                    between distorted and bias-free distances. VAEs are used both as standalone regres-
                                    sors [36,142] and within hybrid frameworks combining recurrent components such
                                    as LSTM units [103]. By learning latent generative representations of LoS and NLoS
                                    propagation effects, these models enable continuous bias correction and improve
                                    robustness across heterogeneous environments.
                               Tree-based and ensemble regressors: Tree ensembles such as RFs, Gradient Boosted Re-
                                    gression Trees (GBRT), and XGBoost are also common, used to regress distance bias
                                    from engineered features derived from the CIR or ToF [44,75,77]. In some cases, these
                                    models are integrated into probabilistic localization pipelines or coupled with EKF to
                                    enhance tracking robustness under NLoS conditions [64,80].
                               Support vector and shallow networks: Support Vector Regression (SVR) and similar shal-
                                   low architectures are used to estimate bias in small-scale or hybrid systems [73,84].
                                   Lightweight feedforward networks and MLPs also serve as efficient regressors for
                                   bias estimation in resource-constrained platforms [81,111]. In some implementa-
                                   tions, MLP modules are conditioned on channel classification results to refine range
                                   corrections [90].


                                                                                                https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                        25 of 56




                            Probabilistic and clustering-based approaches: Several studies rely on GMMs to model
                                 probabilistic distributions of ranging errors, often associated with body shadowing
                                 or ToA variance [70,78]. Bayesian extensions such as Variational Bayesian Gaus-
                                 sian Mixture Model (VBGMM) [100], as well as clustering schemes including Fuzzy
                                 C-Means (FCM), k-means, and Iterative Self-Organizing Data Analysis Technique
                                 Algorithm (ISODATA) [65,66], are used to separate LoS/NLoS measurements and
                                 substitute or reweight biased ranges. These models often act as preprocessing or
                                 filtering layers within larger localization frameworks.
                            Analytical and hybrid regression models: A smaller group of studies explores analytical
                                models such as Gray Model (GM) and Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) for tem-
                                poral bias prediction under limited training data [64,94]. These methods illustrate
                                the incorporation of semi-empirical and hybrid regression strategies into ML-assisted
                                ranging pipelines, providing interpretable alternatives where data availability or
                                computational resources are constrained.

                                 Overall, this functional block reveals a clear trend toward combining data-driven
                            regression models with statistical or filtering techniques to achieve robust bias correction.
                            Deep architectures such as CNNs, LSTMs, and VAEs dominate in high-data scenarios,
                            while ensemble and probabilistic methods remain attractive for real-time and embedded
                            UWB localization systems.

                            5.3.5. Channel Parameter Estimation
                                 This functional stage encompasses nine studies that address the estimation of physical-
                            layer parameters derived from the UWB channel, such as ToF, TDoA, AoA, and PDoA.
                            These parameters serve as essential inputs for subsequent positioning and tracking modules.
                            As summarized in Table 6, recent works combine deep neural architectures and probabilistic
                            modeling to improve parameter estimation under multipath and single-anchor conditions.

                            Table 6. ML models applied to Channel Parameter Estimation. Each occurrence corresponds to a
                            distinct model used within this functional category.

                                                 ML Model                             Occurrences                References
                             Convolutional Neural Network                              3                         [10,137,138]
                             Autoencoder                                               2                           [140,142]
                             Gaussian Mixture Model                                    1                             [143]
                             Gaussian Process Regression                               1                             [139]
                             Multilayer Perceptron                                     1                             [138]
                             Other Neural Network Models                               2                           [141,144]

                            Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.



                            Convolutional architectures: CNNs are the most common approach in this stage (3), used
                                to estimate propagation parameters directly from the CIR. For example, Wang et al.
                                [137] proposed a residual CNN with nine layers for joint amplitude and phase-of-
                                arrival estimation, while [10] applied a deep residual CNN to predict ToF of reflected
                                paths. A lightweight SE-CNN combined with a three-layer MLP was used for multi-
                                path component selection and AoA regression [138].
                            AE and generative models: VAEs are explored to jointly infer distance-related quantities,
                                 such as first-path distance, ToF, or TDoA, and latent propagation parameters. The
                                 VAE-based architectures in [140,142] learn compact generative representations of
                                 multipath profiles, enabling robust recovery of physical parameters under NLoS and
                                 reflective conditions.


                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             26 of 56




                            Dense and hybrid neural networks: Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and fully con-
                                nected designs are adopted as lightweight alternatives for regression of ToA and
                                TDoA values [141,144]. These compact models are suitable for embedded or single-
                                anchor systems where inference latency and computational cost are critical constraints.
                                Similarly, the MLP submodule in [138] maps CNN-extracted features into precise
                                AoA estimates.
                            Probabilistic and analytical models: Probabilistic models are used to capture the uncer-
                                 tainty inherent in multipath-rich channels. GMM describe the wrapped ambiguity of
                                 phase-of-arrival measurements [143], while GPR provides a non-parametric frame-
                                 work for predicting amplitude and SINR distributions [139]. These analytical methods
                                 remain attractive when data availability is limited or interpretability is prioritized
                                 over network complexity.

                                 Overall, this stage highlights the convergence between DL and probabilistic inference
                            for fine-grained recovery of UWB channel parameters.CNNs and VAEs dominate the
                            learning-based estimation of ToF and AoA, whereas GMM and GPR models provide
                            interpretable alternatives for uncertainty quantification and low-data scenarios.

                            5.3.6. Position Estimation
                                 This functional stage includes 39 studies that use ML to estimate the final coordinates
                            of the target tag. These models operate either through direct regression from raw UWB
                            signal features, or as calibration components that refine initial position estimates. Table 7
                            presents the main ML models identified for this task.

                            Convolutional and deep neural networks: CNNs are the most common models for po-
                                sition estimation (13), often used to process CIR features for fingerprinting-based
                                localization [9,127]. Many studies adopt direct position estimation CNN architectures
                                that directly map UWB signal inputs to 2D or 3D coordinates, or integrate convolu-
                                tional layers with additional modules like GRU or Transformer encoders for geometric
                                embedding and temporal context modeling [112,126]. Fully connected Deep Neural
                                Networks (DNNs) also appear frequently, either as standalone regressors [105,132],
                                or as components in hybrid pipelines with TL or sensor fusion [118,185].
                            Recurrent models and hybrid architectures: LSTM-based models (7) are used for sequen-
                                 tial modeling of distance or CIR inputs, often improving robustness under NLoS or
                                 signal loss conditions [99,113]. Hybrid architectures that combine LSTM with Kalman
                                 filters, CNNs, or GRU blocks are also reported, enabling resilient localization un-
                                 der dynamic conditions [127,131]. Other recurrent models include encoder–decoder
                                 LSTM predictors [122], and GRU-based sensor fusion systems [105].
                            Transformers and graph-based models: Transformer-based models are increasingly adopted
                                 for CIR-based fingerprinting, due to their ability to capture long-range dependencies and
                                 generalize across environments [112,128]. Graph-based models, including Graph Neu-
                                 ral Networks (GNNs), Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), and Graph Attention
                                 Networks (GATs), are used to encode spatial relationships between anchors and enhance
                                 positioning accuracy under multipath and NLoS conditions [129,130,135].
                            Shallow and classical models: While DL dominates this stage, shallow models such as
                                 MLPs [187], RFs [186], SVMs [110], and ensemble regressors like XGBoost [119]
                                 remain in use, particularly in resource-constrained or embedded applications. Some
                                 studies apply clustering or k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) regression for fingerprint
                                 matching or anchor selection under hybrid schemes [115,121,134].




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                           27 of 56




                               Table 7. ML models applied to Position Estimation. Each occurrence corresponds to a distinct model
                               used within this functional category.

                    ML Model                   Occurrences                                      References
 Deep Neural Network                                  14             [33,105,106,108,109,111,114,117,118,123,132,136,184,185]
 Convolutional Neural Network                     7                                    [9,73,116,120,125–127]
 Long Short-Term Memory Network                   7                                [99,106,113,120,122,127,131]
 Transformer-Based Models                       3                                           [112,127,128]
 k-Nearest Neighbors                            3                                           [121,134,186]
 Multilayer Perceptron                          3                                           [124,133,187]
 Support Vector Machine                         1                                               [110]
 Clustering-Based Methods                       1                                               [115]
 XGBoost                                        1                                               [119]
 Gaussian Mixture Model                         1                                               [184]
 Random Forest                                  1                                               [186]
 Recurrent Neural Network                       1                                               [112]
 Other Neural Networks                           6                                   [108,129,130,135,141,186]

                               Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.



                                    Position estimation tasks exhibit the most diverse set of models among all functional
                               stages. As shown in Table 7, CNNs and LSTMs are the most common, but several advanced
                               architectures are emerging, such as Transformers, GNNs, and metaheuristic-optimized net-
                               works. While many approaches focus on improving regression accuracy, others emphasize
                               generalization, robustness, or online adaptability.

                               5.3.7. Sequential Tracking and Trajectory Estimation
                                    Only one study was identified within this functional stage. As shown in Table 8, a
                               CNN was applied to analyze temporal variations of the CIR and to classify movement
                               patterns from amplitude and phase information [145]. The resulting classifications were
                               subsequently processed through a path-finding algorithm to reconstruct complete move-
                               ment trajectories based on the spatial layout constraints.

                               Table 8. ML models applied to Sequential Tracking and Trajectory Estimation. Each occurrence
                               corresponds to a distinct model used within this functional category.

                                                      ML Model                           Occurrences                References
                                Convolutional Neural Network                              1                             [145]
                               Note: Bar length and color intensity indicate the frequency of model usage.


                               5.3.8. Number of Layers in CNN and DNN Architectures
                                     Tables 9 and 10 summarize the DL architectures employed for UWB-based indoor
                               localization between 2020 and 2024. Overall, CNNs represent the dominant choice across
                               studies, reflecting their ability to extract spatial and temporal patterns from raw CIR data.
                               By contrast, DNNs and Feedforward/Backpropagation Networks are often adopted for
                               lighter tasks such as feature-based classification, ranging error correction, or data fusion. For
                               the sake of brevity in the Architecture Summary column, common layer abbreviations are
                               utilized: Convolutional (Conv), Fully Connected (FC) (Dense), Batch Normalization (BN),
                               and Maximum Pooling (MaxPool) layers.




                                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             28 of 56




                            Table 9. Summary of CNN architectures for ML-based UWB indoor localization.

 DL Model                      Architecture Summary                               Depth                   Reference
 AE-CNN                        AE encoder–decoder + CNN head.                        5                       [28]
 CNN                           Conv + MaxPool + FC + Softmax.                       4                        [30]
 CNN-LSTM                      2 Conv + Pool + FC + LSTM + Softmax.                 5                       [150]
 CNN                           4 Conv1D + Pool + 2 FC + Softmax.                     7                       [50]
 CNN                           Conv + MaxPool + FC.                                  6                       [53]
 CNN (ResNet/FCN)              ResNet encoder + FCN variant.                        11                       [31]
 CNN                           2 Conv2D + 2 MaxPool + 3 FC.                          7                       [73]
 ResNet (1D CNN)               1 Conv1D + 6 ResBlocks + 2 FC.                        9                      [137]
 REMNet                        1D Conv + 3 Residual Modules + FC.                    7                       [71]
 CNN                           4 Conv + 4 FC.                                        8                      [189]
 CNN                           5 Conv + 3 Pool + 2 FC.                              10                       [43]
 CNN                           3 Conv + MaxPool + 2 FC.                              6                      [145]
 CNN + FC                      3 Conv + Pool + 4 FC.                                 8                      [116]
 CNN + LSTM                    4 Conv3D + FC + LSTM.                                 9                      [120]
 PLN (CNN + MLP)               CNN + MLP + Fusion FC.                                8                      [138]
 CNN (Residual)                Conv + BN + ReLU + Pool + FC.                         8                       [56]
 REMNet (1D-CNN)               3 Residual Modules + FC.                              6                       [74]
 TCN + Attention               Dilated Conv + Residual + Attention + FC.             8                       [10]
 ININN (CNN + GRU + SE)        2 Conv + BN + Pool + GRU + SE-Att.                   12                      [178]
 CNN (1D)                      5 Conv + Pool + FC.                                   8                       [45]
 Wavelet-CNN                   5 Conv + Pool + FC.                                   8                      [174]
 Parallel GRU + CNN            GRU + 4 Conv + Pool + FC.                            10                       [55]
 Multi-stream CNN              3 parallel CNN streams + FC.                         21                       [49]
 DLRC (CNN + FC)               5 Conv + BN + FC.                                     7                      [126]
 CNN (anchor-subset)           Multi-CNN (Conv + Pool + FC).                         7                        [9]
 C-T-CNN-SVM                   3 Conv + Pool + 2 FC.                                 5                       [46]
 ECA-ResNet                    Residual CNN + Attention + Pool + FC.                12                       [82]
 MPCM (CNN + LSTM + Transf.)   3 Conv + LSTM + Transformer + FC.                    9                       [127]
 MPCM + ADM                    MPCM + LSTM + MLP.                                   12                      [127]
 CNN + ResNet18 (SE)           Dual CNN + ResNet18 + Fusion FC.                     20                      [154]
 MIPL (CNN + ResNet18 + RSS)   CNN + ResNet + SE + FC.                              22                       [79]
 WGCNN                         2 Conv + 2 Pool + FC.                                 6                       [38]
 CNN + LSTM                    4 Conv + LSTM + FC.                                   7                       [47]
 Hybrid Quantum CNN            QCNN (Conv + Pool + FC).                              6                       [59]
 Hybrid Quantum CNN (8q)       QCNN (2 Conv + 2 Pool + FC).                          6                       [60]
 IDBO-CNN                      3 Conv + 3 Pool + 2 FC.                               8                      [155]
 ST-CNN + TL                   CNN (Conv + Pool + FC).                               8                      [157]
 CNN-BiLSTM-Attention          2 Conv + Pool + BiLSTM + Att. + FC.                  8                       [180]
 EMD-WD-CNN                    Conv + Pool + FC.                                     6                      [169]
 CNN-LSTM                      Conv + Pool + LSTM + FC.                              7                       [85]
 CNN-LSTM + WLS                CNN-LSTM + WLS fusion.                                7                       [85]
 CNN + LightGBM                4 Conv + Pool + FC.                                   6                       [88]
 TL-CNN (raw CIR)              3 Conv1D + Pool + FC.                                 6                       [96]
 Denoising CNN                 Conv1D + Pool + GlobalAvgPool + FC.                   4                       [93]
 CNN (LS-AVPI)                 Conv + Pool + FC + Dropout.                           5                      [182]
 Lightweight CNN               5 Conv + 2 Pool + 2 FC.                               9                      [159]
 CNN (Conv1D)                  2 Conv1D + FC.                                        4                      [177]
 Dual-channel CNN (TCN-Att.)   3 Conv + 6 TCN + Self-Att. + FC.                     13                      [160]
 CNN (under-sampled)           3 Conv1D + FC.                                        5                      [172]
 FCN + Self-Att.               3 Conv1D + Pool + Self-Att. + 2 FC.                   9                      [162]
 Bayesian Conv-BLSTM           Conv1D + BLSTM + Att. + FC.                          8                        [67]
 CNN-LSTM (NN-UWB)             2 Conv1D + Pool + LSTM + FC.                          7                       [90]
 1D-CLANet                     3 Conv1D + Pool + LSTM + SE-Att. + FC.               9                       [188]
 MTF-CNN                       5 Conv2D + Pool + 3 FC.                               8                      [165]




                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             29 of 56




                            Table 10. Summary of DNN architectures for ML-based UWB indoor localization.

                             DL Model                       Architecture Summary                     Depth       Reference
                             FNN                            3 FC (50-50-50).                           5              [8]
                             GA-RBF NN                      RBF with 1 hidden (52).                    3            [109]
                             FFNN                           3 hidden (20-40-40).                       6             [33]
                             DNN (TL)                       2 FC nets (5 + 4).                         5            [185]
                             DNN                            3 FC + Softmax.                            5            [106]
                             FFNN (BP)                      1-4 hidden FC (3-15).                      5            [114]
                             FCNN (Range)                   3 FC (2040-1000-1000).                      3           [111]
                             FCNN (Coord.)                  3 FC (1000-1000-out).                      3            [111]
                             GA-ELM                         1 hidden + FC out.                         3            [117]
                             Transfer Learning NN           2-stage DNN (5 + 4 FC).                    5            [118]
                             HHO-BPNN                       3 FC + sigmoid.                            3            [136]
                             Lightweight FCNN               1 hidden (224).                            3             [11]
                             BPNN                           3 FC (4-9-4).                              3            [183]
                             TinyML NN                      1 hidden (20).                             2            [123]
                             DBN                            3 RBMs + BP fine-tuning.                   6            [108]
                             DNN (VIUNet)                   3 FC (256-256-3).                          3            [105]
                             LTSSO-BPNN                     1 hidden (13).                             3             [68]
                             INDDNN                         1D CNN (9 Conv + 8 Pool) + 5 FC.           23           [175]
                             DNN + TL                       3 FC (256-256-2).                          3            [166]
                             DFNN                           3 hidden (100).                            5            [161]
                             Optuna-LightGBM + DNN          4 hidden (10) per sub-area.                6             [63]
                             WF-BP NN                       3 FC (7 hidden).                           3             [91]
                             UKF-FNN-RIC                    1 hidden (10).                             3             [87]
                             DNN-EKF Fusion                 3 hidden (50).                             5            [102]
                             DNN (GWO-AOA)                  2 hidden FC.                               4            [132]
                             DNN + TL (range error)         4 FC + Dropout + BN.                       6             [96]
                             DNN + TL (NLoS)                4 FC + Softmax.                            5             [96]


                                  The depth of the architectures varies widely depending on the task complexity and
                            data modality. For CNN-based designs, the most common range lies between 5 and
                            9 layers, as in [30,50,145,189], balancing expressiveness and training cost. Deeper variants
                            exceeding 10 layers, including residual and multi-stream models (e.g., FCN-Attention or
                            Dual-Channel CNN-TCN networks [160,162]), appear in studies addressing complex multi-
                            environment or multi-class NLoS identification, where hierarchical feature abstraction
                            improves robustness. Lightweight CNNs with fewer than 5 layers are typically used in
                            denoising or signal enhancement tasks (e.g., [93,177]).
                                  In contrast, DNN-based architectures remain shallower, usually employing 3–6 fully
                            connected layers (e.g., [106,111,161]). Their simplicity suits feature-based regression and
                            classification, where CIR-derived parameters (e.g., power, delay spread, rise time) serve as
                            compact inputs. However, some studies introduce metaheuristic optimization (e.g., LTSSO-
                            BP [68], GWO-DNN [132]) or TL mechanisms [96,166] to enhance generalization with
                            minimal architectural overhead. The deepest DNN design (23 layers) corresponds to the
                            hybrid INDDNN model [175], combining CNN and dense layers for multi-class LoS/NLoS
                            recognition, illustrating the convergence of CNN and DNN paradigms in recent work.
                                  Figure 7 depicts the distribution of network depths across all surveyed studies. While
                            CNNs span a broader range (3–21 layers), DNNs concentrate between 3 and 6 layers. This
                            difference is primarily driven by input dimensionality: CNNs require deeper hierarchi-
                            cal structures to effectively extract spatial–temporal patterns from high-dimensional raw
                            CIR waveforms. In contrast, DNNs typically operate on low-dimensional handcrafted
                            features, such as peak power, rise time, or RSS, which can be effectively mapped to coordi-
                            nates or classes using shallower architectures with fewer hidden layers, thereby reducing
                            computational complexity for resource-constrained edge devices.




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                           30 of 56




                                  Moreover, architectures introduced after 2022 show a gradual shift toward hybrid models
                            (e.g., CNN-LSTM, CNN-Attention, or CNN-TCN) and fusion schemes (e.g., DNN-EKF or
                            AE-CNN), where deep learning modules are embedded within traditional probabilistic or
                            optimization-based frameworks to balance localization accuracy with computational efficiency.

                                                                                         CNN     DNN



                                                26


                                                24                  23

                                                22
                                                                                                         20
                                                20


                                                18
                            Number of studies




                                                16
                                                               14
                                                14
                                                                                12
                                                12


                                                10
                                                                                                                                    8
                                                8


                                                6


                                                4    3

                                                2                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                       0
                                                0
                                                         2–4             5–7                                    8–10                    11–23
                                                                               Depth range (number of layers)



                            Figure 7. Distribution of CNN and DNN network depth in UWB localization studies (2020–2024).

                                 In summary, CNN-based architectures dominate signal-level processing stages, pro-
                            viding robust spatial–temporal modeling, whereas DNNs remain central to post-processing
                            and feature-based correction stages due to their simplicity, low latency, and adaptability to
                            embedded implementations.

                            5.4. RQ3. How Are ML-Based UWB Positioning Methods Evaluated in Terms of Experimental
                            Design, Performance Metrics, Validation Procedures, and Reproducibility?
                                 To address RQ3, the evaluation of UWB-based systems incorporating ML is analyzed
                            in terms of performance metrics, experimental setups, and reported outcomes. A total of
                            169 studies were reviewed and grouped according to their functional category: channel
                            condition classification (83 studies), ranging error mitigation (60 studies), and position
                            estimation (39 studies).

                            5.4.1. Reported Metrics
                                  Regression-based studies predominantly used RMSE, and occasionally MAE, to quan-
                            tify ranging or positioning accuracy. Classification-based studies mainly relied on Accuracy,
                            followed by Precision, Recall, and F1-score for LoS/NLoS discrimination. A limited num-
                            ber of studies reported additional indicators such as bias, Standard Deviation (STD), or
                            Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of error.
                                  Figure 8 summarizes the relative frequency of each metric per task category, based on
                            manual annotation of all 169 papers. As some studies contribute to multiple tasks in the
                            pipeline, the metric counts reflect task-specific occurrences rather than unique articles.




                                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                      31 of 56




                                                                            2%
                                                                                 4%
                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                                                      11.1%                 Error Metrics
                                                                38.2%                                       Recall
                                                                                         14.1%              F1−score
                                                                                                            Precision

                                                                                      14.1%                 AUC
                                                                        16.6%                               Others



                                                                                          (a)

                                                5.7%                                                           3.9%
                                                       4.7%                                                           5.9%
                                                                                 RMSE                                                         RMSE
                                                          7.5%                                                               7.8%
                                                                                 MAE            35.3%                                         MAE
                              44.3%                             9.4%             STD                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                                              13.7%
                                                                                 Accuracy                                                     STD
                                                                                 MSE                                                          MSE

                                                   28.3%                         Others                                                       ATE
                                                                                                             33.3%


                                                              (b)                                                            (c)
                             Figure 8. Distribution of evaluation metrics across the three ML stages: (a) channel condition
                             identification, (b) ranging error mitigation, and (c) direct position estimation.

                             5.4.2. Observed Results
                                  A summary of performance indicators and reported testbed areas is provided in
                             Table 11. RMSE values below 0.2 m were common in controlled setups, while classification
                             accuracy was above 95 % in most cases. Hybrid CNN–LSTM or attention-based models
                             achieved the highest performance levels. Due to overlapping processing stages, RMSE
                             values often appear in both ranging and positioning categories.

                             Table 11. Performance metrics and reported experimental areas for ML-based UWB positioning tasks.
                             Each range corresponds to studies explicitly reporting both metric values and testbed area.

 Functional Task                                       Studies             Main Metric             Metric Range                    Experimental Area
 Channel condition classification             25 (area + metric)            Accuracy                 81.4–100%                        16–4420 m2
 Ranging error mitigation                     31 (area + metric)             RMSE                 0.0023–0.6242 m                     16–1125 m2
 Position estimation                          11 (area + metric)             RMSE                 0.0091–0.6242 m                      16–130 m2

                             Note: “area + metric” indicates the subset of studies that explicitly reported both the performance metric and the
                             physical area of the experimental testbed.



                             5.4.3. Experimental Configurations and Data Modalities
                                  Experimental evaluations are predominantly conducted in controlled indoor environ-
                             ments, mainly laboratories and office-like spaces, typically covering areas smaller than
                             150 m2 . Large-scale deployments in warehouses, factories, or public buildings are com-
                             paratively rare, indicating a strong bias toward small- and medium-scale testbeds in the
                             current literature.
                                  From a hardware perspective, the Decawave (Qorvo) DW1000 transceiver family and its
                             associated evaluation platforms (e.g., EVB1000, DWM1000/DWM1001, MDEK1001) dominate


                                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                               32 of 56




                            experimental configurations, accounting for approximately 90–95% of the reported systems.
                            More recent transceivers, such as the DW3000 series, appear only marginally in studies
                            published after 2023, reflecting the inertia of established experimental platforms.
                                 Regarding infrastructure design, the most common deployment consists of a single
                            mobile tag and four fixed anchors arranged around the test area, balancing coverage and
                            system complexity. Denser anchor configurations (six to eight anchors) are mainly reported
                            in highly obstructed or industrial-like environments, while minimal setups with three
                            anchors are typically restricted to constrained two-dimensional scenarios.
                                 Ground truth acquisition follows heterogeneous methodologies. Dynamic experiments
                            most frequently rely on high-precision optical motion-capture systems (e.g., OptiTrack or
                            Vicon), whereas static evaluations often employ laser-based measurements, robotic total stations,
                            or manually surveyed reference grids. For channel-condition studies, LoS/NLoS labels are
                            commonly obtained through controlled obstacle placement, manual annotation, or synchronized
                            reference systems, although labeling procedures are rarely standardized across studies.
                                 From a data availability and reproducibility perspective, approximately 75–80% of
                            the reviewed works rely on private or ad hoc datasets collected for a specific deployment,
                            while only 20–25% explicitly employ publicly available benchmarks. Input data modalities
                            vary substantially: most studies exploit raw UWB CIR information, either as amplitude-
                            only samples or as complex-valued In-phase and Quadrature (IQ) representations, often
                            complemented by timestamps, ToF estimates, RSS, and proprietary diagnostic features.
                                 Among the available open resources, the dataset released by Stocker et al. [191] (TU
                            Graz) is particularly relevant for commercial IPS deployments. It addresses the ambiguity
                            between LoS and NLoS conditions by introducing a Weak Line-of-Sight (WLoS) category
                            for minor obstructions.
                                 Public datasets typically report anchor-tag configurations ranging from single-anchor
                            setups to networks of up to nine anchors, but environmental diversity remains limited.
                            This heterogeneity in experimental design, data modalities, and labeling procedures directly
                            constrains the reproducibility and comparability of reported results across the state of the art.

                            5.4.4. Reporting Consistency
                                Approximately 60% of studies did not specify essential details such as the testbed area,
                            anchor geometry, or the computation procedure for RMSE or Accuracy. Only a minority of
                            works provided full reproducibility information, including environment dimensions and
                            measurement protocols, limiting quantitative comparison between studies.

                            5.4.5. Implications and Observed Limitations
                                 The dominance of RMSE and Accuracy as reporting metrics simplifies benchmarking;
                            however, only a subset of papers provided both performance metrics and testbed area (25 for
                            classification, 31 for ranging correction, and 11 for positioning). As a consequence, the
                            generalizability of reported improvements remains constrained by incomplete documentation.
                                 These inconsistencies hinder a fair assessment of how ML methods contribute to
                            UWB localization performance. Without standardized evaluation protocols and complete
                            metadata, it is difficult to isolate the benefit of the learning model from that of the experi-
                            mental conditions.
                                 Overall, the findings from RQ3 show that current evaluation practices strongly con-
                            dition the interpretation of ML contributions to UWB-based IPSs. Future studies would
                            benefit from clearer reporting standards and unified benchmarking frameworks, enabling
                            greater transparency and reproducibility across environments and acquisition setups.




                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                                       33 of 56




                                      5.5. RQ4. What Public Datasets or Benchmarks Are Available for Combining UWB and ML, and
                                      How Are They Used to Improve the Reproducibility and Comparability of Results?
                                            Only a limited number of studies explicitly report the use of publicly available datasets
                                      for UWB-ML experimentation. These open resources provide the foundation for reproducible
                                      benchmarking. A structured summary of these datasets, explicitly detailing data modalities
                                      (e.g., amplitude vs. complex IQ), anchor-tag configurations, environmental conditions, and
                                      ground truth acquisition procedures, is provided in Table 12. These datasets address several
                                      reproducibility gaps identified in RQ3 by offering standardized benchmarks for comparison.

                                      Table 12. Public datasets and benchmarks used for ML-based UWB localization. The table details
                                      input data modalities, hardware platforms, and the ground truth acquisition methodology.

 Dataset                    Year    Content: Input, Hardware & Ground Truth                      Environment                 Representative Usage
                                    CIR (Amp. & Complex IQ), ToF, RSS.
 eWINE (Log-a-                                                                                   Lab, apartment, office,
                            2016–   Hardware: Decawave DW1000.                                                               [30,39,53,54,88,144,162]
 Tec) [192]                                                                                      workshop
                            2023    Ground Truth: Optical Mocap & Laser.
                                    CIR (157 samples), range, features.
                                                                                                 Lab,        Industrial
 DeepUWB [193]              2020    Hardware: Decawave EVB1000.                                                              [61,71,144]
                                                                                                 (metal/glass)
                                    Ground Truth: Laser distance meter.
                                    Raw CIR & Chip Diagnostics. Labels: LoS/WLoS/NLoS.
 Stocker et al. (TU                                                                              Office, Lab, Corridor
                            2021    Hardware: Decawave DWM1001.                                                              [61,139,157]
 Graz) [191]                                                                                     (35k samples)
                                    Ground Truth: Leica Total Station.
                                    CIR features & RSS. Labels: LoS/NLoS/Multipath.
 Bielefeld     Univ.
                            2020    Hardware: Decawave DW1000.                                   Corridors, Halls            [52,175]
 [52]
                                    Ground Truth: Manual grid.
                                    Ranging data & CIR.
 Datasets of In-
                            2022    Hardware: Decawave MDEK1001.                                 Office, Laboratory          [95]
 door UWB [194]
                                    Ground Truth: Known anchor positions.
                                    ToF, CIR, RSS, clock-skew.
 LocURa4IoT [195]           2021    Hardware: IEEE 802.15.4 UWB nodes.                           Controlled IoT testbed      [132]
                                    Ground Truth: Pre-surveyed grid.
                                    Complex CIR (IQ) & Range.
 IPIN 2021 Track 7
                            2021    Hardware: Decawave DW1000.                                   Industrial hall (300 m2 )   [9]
 [196]
                                    Ground Truth: Millimeter-accurate Optical Mocap.
                                    Multi-static Radar CIR.
 ETH       Zürich
                            2020    Hardware: DW1000 (Radar mode).                               Laboratory (50 m2 )         [10]
 Radar [197]
                                    Ground Truth: Vicon Optical Mocap.
 Other        public                Open datasets for RSS-based ranging, trust, fingerprinting
                            2019–                                                                Office, Industrial          [76,83,135,186]
 datasets                           and cooperative loc.
                            2024



                                           The eWINE-project dataset [192] is the most frequently reused benchmark for
                                      LoS/NLoS classification in UWB-based ML. Originally collected in 2018 within the Eu-
                                      ropean H2020 eWINE project at the Jožef Stefan Institute, it was released on Zenodo
                                      between 2021 and 2023 in several versions. The dataset contains 42,000 CIR and ToF sam-
                                      ples acquired with nine Decawave DW1000 transceivers across four indoor environments
                                      (laboratory, office, apartment, and workshop). It includes anchor coordinates, LoS/NLoS
                                      annotations, and reference tag trajectories, supporting reproducible evaluation of DNN for
                                      channel classification and bias correction. Several studies explicitly state their use of this
                                      dataset, including [30,39,53,54,59,69,85,88,141,144,150,152,155,160,162,180]. The eWINE
                                      collection has thus become the de facto open benchmark for DL-based LoS/NLoS identifi-
                                      cation and NLoS bias mitigation in UWB localization.
                                           The DeepUWB dataset [193], introduced in 2020, was designed to support reproducible
                                      research on range-error mitigation. It includes more than 55,000 CIR traces (157 features
                                      per record) collected with Decawave EVB1000 transceivers and labeled with laser-based
                                      ground truth ranges. The data were gathered across five configurations, three indoor
                                      rooms of different sizes, one cross-room setup, and one outdoor environment, each with


                                                                                                         https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                            34 of 56




                            multiple obstacle types (walls, plywood, glass, plastic, and metal). DeepUWB has been
                            reused in several works addressing learning-based range correction and feature-selection
                            strategies [61,71,74,141,144].
                                  The Bielefeld University dataset [52], published as Supplementary Research Data for
                            the Paper entitled Identification of NLoS and Multipath Conditions in UWB Localization
                            using ML methods, provides extracted UWB signal features labeled as LoS, NLoS, and
                            multipath conditions. It also includes source code for scikit-learn-based classifiers. The
                            dataset was collected in university corridors and laboratory environments and has been
                            reused in later studies on multi-class channel-state classification and TL [52,175,176].
                                  The LocURa4IoT dataset [195], developed by Adrien Van Den Bossche, Réjane Dalcé,
                            Quentin Vey, and Thierry Val at IRIT/CNRS Toulouse, comprises a series of open-access
                            datasets dedicated to the precise localization of wireless nodes in IoT environments. The
                            experiments, performed between 2021 and 2022, include ToF-based ranging data collected
                            with IEEE 802.15.4 UWB transceivers under both LoS and NLoS conditions. Each dataset
                            contains JSON-formatted logs with timestamps, range errors, clock skew, RSS, CIR samples,
                            and 3D anchor-tag coordinates. These datasets have been explicitly used in [132] to train
                            and benchmark DL models optimized via meta-heuristic algorithms for indoor localization.
                                  The IPIN 2021 Track 7 dataset [196], created by Sebastian Kram, Maximilian Stahlke,
                            and Christopher Mutschler at Fraunhofer IIS/FAU Erlangen–Nürnberg, contains synchro-
                            nized complex CIR measurements (real + imaginary) and millimeter-accurate ground truth
                            trajectories acquired with Decawave DW1000 transceivers. The experiments were con-
                            ducted in an industrial hall of about 300 m2 under two conditions (static and modified
                            clutter), enabling the evaluation of localization robustness and generalization. It has been
                            reused in studies on CIR-based fingerprinting and error mitigation [9].
                                  The dataset released by Stocker et al. [191] (TU Graz) is particularly relevant for
                            commercial IPS deployments. It addresses the ambiguity between LoS and NLoS conditions
                            by introducing a WLoS category for minor obstructions. Collected using commercial
                            Decawave DWM1001-DEV nodes, it provides over 35,000 ranging measurements. Due to
                            its use of commercial hardware and precise labeling, this dataset has been widely adopted
                            in recent ML studies for channel state identification and error mitigation [61,139,157].
                                  The ETH Zürich dataset [197], published in 2020 by Anton Ledergerber and Raffaello
                            D’Andrea, provides multi-static UWB radar measurements with synchronized ground
                            truth obtained via a Vicon motion-capture system. The data include complex CIR samples
                            (DW1000 transceivers) and 3D trajectories for multiple transmitter–receiver pairs (IDs
                            0–4). Experiments were conducted in a controlled laboratory environment of about 50 m2 ,
                            enabling high-precision analysis of ToF estimation and AoA inference [10].
                                  The UTIL dataset [198], released in 2022, provides UWB TDoA measurements for
                            graph-based and multi-agent indoor localization. It has been primarily used in recent
                            works employing GATs and neural message-passing architectures for cooperative UWB
                            positioning [135].
                                  Additional publicly available datasets further enhance reproducibility in UWB-ML
                            research. Josep Moragrega [95,194] published the Datasets of Indoor UWB Measurements
                            for Ranging and Positioning in Good and Challenging Scenarios on Zenodo, while David
                            Botler [76,199] released three RSS-based UWB datasets for distance estimation. Matthias
                            Peterseil [83] made available the UWB WLoS structured dataset and the UWB AEC-trust
                            dataset, and Dominik Csik [186] released a multimodal fingerprinting dataset integrating
                            Wi-Fi, UWB, and RSS features. Muhammad Fahem Majeed [175] contributed the UWB
                            DW1000 Dataset for Indoor Environments on IEEE DataPort, while Pieter Fontaine [28]
                            released the Industrial-UWB-localization-CIR-dataset, an industrial-hall benchmark widely
                            used for CIR-based fingerprinting and TL.



                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             35 of 56




                                  Together, these open datasets have progressively improved traceability and compara-
                            bility in UWB-based ML research. Their increasing adoption since 2020 has fostered more
                            transparent evaluation practices, paving the way for standardized benchmarks for future
                            indoor positioning studies.

                            Dataset Limitations, Standardization, and Benchmarking
                                 Beyond the increasing availability of open data, the reviewed literature reveals signifi-
                            cant challenges regarding the utility and systematic standardization of existing datasets.
                            Three major issues currently impede the reproducibility and cross-study comparability of
                            ML-based UWB research:

                            Site-Specificity and Hardware Dependency: A pervasive limitation is the strong envi-
                                  ronmental bias in training data. Models trained on datasets collected in specific
                                  layouts, such as laboratories or offices, often suffer significant performance degra-
                                  dation when deployed in unseen environments due to differing multipath profiles
                                  [50,96]. Furthermore, the overwhelming dominance of the Decawave DW1000 chip
                                  in public repositories limits the assessment of model robustness across different
                                  hardware vendors, pulse shapes, or newer Institute of Electrical and Electronics
                                  Engineers (IEEE) 802.15.4z-compliant transceivers.
                            Lack of Data Representation Standards: There is no unified format for representing UWB
                                 signal features. While some datasets provide the full 1016-sample CIR, others offer
                                 truncated windows around the first path or transformed 2D representations, such as
                                 wavelet or Gramian fields [38,174]. This heterogeneity in pre-processing pipelines
                                 makes it difficult to conduct fair performance comparisons, as the input dimension-
                                 ality and signal-to-noise ratio vary significantly across studies. Moreover, the lack
                                 of information regarding the quantization and sampling rates of the recorded CIR
                                 further complicates the normalization of data across heterogeneous hardware.
                            Limited Cross-Algorithm Benchmarking: Despite the emergence of datasets like eWINE
                                 [192] and DeepUWB [193] as de facto benchmarks, cross-algorithm validation re-
                                 mains the exception rather than the rule. Most authors continue to validate novel
                                 architectures on proprietary, non-public data, which prevents the research community
                                 from establishing a clear state-of-the-art for specific positioning tasks.

                                 Addressing these shortcomings through unified data formats and the adoption of
                            cross-environment validation protocols is essential to move the field beyond site-specific
                            proofs of concept toward generalizable positioning solutions.

                            5.6. RQ5. What Are the Main Challenges, Limitations, and Open Issues Identified in Applying ML
                            to UWB-Based Indoor Positioning, and What Directions for Future Research Are Suggested?
                            5.6.1. Main Challenges and Limitations
                                The reviewed studies reveal several persistent challenges in the application of ML to
                            UWB-based indoor positioning. These challenges arise both from the intrinsic properties of
                            UWB propagation and from practical constraints associated with data-driven model design
                            and deployment.

                            Intrinsic UWB signal issues: The primary limitation originates from the NLoS phe-
                                  nomenon and multipath propagation effects. NLoS conditions introduce a positive
                                  ranging bias. Reflected signals travel longer paths than direct ones, producing de-
                                  viations that can exceed one meter. Complex and dynamic indoor environments,
                                  characterized by walls, furniture, and moving people, further distort the CIR. More-
                                  over, similar CIR patterns can yield different ranging errors and conversely, similar



                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             36 of 56




                                 errors can arise from dissimilar CIRs, which complicates model training and reduces
                                 prediction consistency.
                            Data collection and training limitations: The performance of ML algorithms strongly de-
                                 pends on large, high-quality datasets, although collecting such data is costly and
                                 time-consuming. Fingerprinting-based approaches require dense measurement cam-
                                 paigns, particularly in large-scale environments. Obtaining reliable ground truth
                                 positions for supervised training often demands external high-precision systems
                                 such as Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) or motion-capture setups. Class im-
                                 balance is another recurring issue: LoS samples are typically much more abundant
                                 than NLoS ones, leading to biased models that perform poorly under challenging
                                 propagation conditions.
                            Generalization and robustness: Most ML models are site-specific and exhibit limited
                                transferability to unseen environments. Variations in room geometry, antenna config-
                                uration, and multipath characteristics cause performance degradation when models
                                are applied to new settings. Furthermore, the dominance of binary LoS/NLoS classi-
                                fication oversimplifies real-world conditions, neglecting intermediate or mixed cases
                                such as hard NLoS or obstacle-type differentiation.
                            Computational and deployment constraints: High model complexity restricts real-time
                                deployment on low-power UWB devices. Deep architectures designed for accuracy
                                often require heavy computation and large memory. Embedded hardware such as
                                microcontrollers or edge nodes often fail to sustain inference at high update rates.
                                In addition, preprocessing stages, such as transforming CIR data into image-like
                                formats, introduce additional computational overhead and latency, limiting real-
                                time operation.

                            5.6.2. Future Research Directions
                                 Based on the synthesis of the reviewed studies, the path for new research in this field
                            should transition from generic exploration toward specific objectives aimed at overcoming
                            current technical bottlenecks. We propose a research roadmap structured around four
                            strategic phases:

                            Phase 1: Advanced Signal Preprocessing (Generative and Unsupervised): To address the
                                 scarcity and imbalance of NLoS data, research is shifting toward the use of GANs
                                 for synthetic CIR generation [48] and few-shot environment adaptation [149]. Fur-
                                 thermore, transforming 1D signals into 2D representations using Gramian Angular
                                 Fields (GAFs) [38,79] or Complex Gaussian Wavelets [160] is recommended to better
                                 exploit the hierarchical feature extraction capabilities of ResNet-like architectures.
                                 Finally, unsupervised integrity monitoring using VAEs [36,171] or LSTM-based AEs
                                 [83] should be prioritized to generate real-time trustworthiness scores and detect
                                 signal manipulation.
                            Phase 2: Semantic Classification and Domain Adaptation: Future work must move be-
                                 yond binary LoS/NLoS identification toward semantic context awareness, identify-
                                 ing specific materials (e.g., concrete, glass, or metal) to apply material-specific bias
                                 corrections [47,67,90]. To solve the site-specificity problem, research should prioritize
                                 DA using Domain Adversarial Neural Networks (DANNs) [181] and Lab-to-Real
                                 transfer strategies [166]. For practical deployment, Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML)
                                 strategies using quantization and pruning [61,71,123] are essential to enable ML
                                 inference on microcontrollers with sub-millisecond latency.
                            Phase 3: Probabilistic and Hybrid Error Mitigation: To prevent inconsistent corrections,
                                 future models should focus on uncertainty quantification using Monte Carlo Dropout


                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             37 of 56




                                  [67] or Stochastic Variational Gaussian Processs (SVGPs) [75]. This allows hybrid
                                  architectures to dynamically adjust the noise covariance matrices (Q and R) of filters
                                  like the EKF or Pose Graphs [36,103,158]. Additionally, self-supervised learning
                                  using geometric residuals [35,126] offers a path to refine error models in situ without
                                  requiring manual ground truth labeling.
                            Phase 4: Next-Generation Positioning (Graph and Attention Models): To model complex
                                 spatial relationships between anchors and tags, the adoption of GATs [135] and
                                 spatial–temporal GNNs [129,130] is recommended. For sequential tracking, Transformer-
                                 based encoders [54,128] and BERT-style architectures [167] show superior capacity
                                 over LSTMs for capturing long-range dependencies in CIR sequences. Finally, deep
                                 multimodal fusion (e.g., VIU-Net [105] or Deep Belief Network (DBN)-based systems
                                 [108]) should be explored to integrate UWB, vision, and inertial data at the latent
                                 feature level.

                                 In summary, while generalization across environments remains the dominant challenge,
                            emerging advances in TL, attention mechanisms, and lightweight embedded implementations
                            indicate a transition toward more robust and adaptive UWB localization systems.

                            6. Discussion
                                 This section discusses and interprets the findings of this systematic review according
                            to the MRQ and the five specific RQs (RQ1–RQ5) defined in Section 4. It synthesizes
                            the empirical patterns identified in Section 5 and interprets them in terms of how ML
                            contributes to accuracy, robustness, and adaptability in UWB-based positioning systems.

                            6.1. MRQ. How Do ML Algorithms Contribute to UWB-Based Indoor Positioning Systems?
                                 This review shows that ML enhances UWB indoor positioning by improving signal
                            interpretation, mitigating range errors, and strengthening decision-making stages such
                            as channel classification and coordinate estimation. Rather than replacing traditional ge-
                            ometric methods, ML is typically integrated as a complementary module that models
                            nonlinearities and uncertainties in the CIR. This hybridization between physics-based and
                            data-driven approaches has demonstrated promising improvements in reducing NLoS bias
                            and achieving decimeter-level or even centimeter-level accuracy under complex propa-
                            gation conditions. However, current evidence indicates that the most consistent benefits
                            arise when ML is used to support, not replace, traditional solvers, reinforcing the need for
                            interpretable and computationally efficient hybrid architectures.

                            6.2. RQ1. What Specific Tasks or Functions Within the Pipeline of UWB-Based Indoor Positioning
                            Systems Are Addressed Through ML Algorithms?
                                  The analysis identified six major functional tasks in which ML techniques have been
                            applied: signal denoising and preprocessing, channel condition classification (LoS/NLoS),
                            ranging error mitigation, data fusion or hybridization, position estimation, and sequential
                            tracking. As evidenced by the results, the majority of studies concentrate on channel classi-
                            fication and ranging error mitigation. This confirms that ML currently plays a primarily
                            supporting role, acting as a non-linear compensator for physical-layer impairments before
                            measurements are fed into traditional geometric solvers.
                                  A critical conceptual distinction emerges from how these tasks address multipath
                            propagation. The literature reveals two contrasting design paradigms:
                            Multipath Suppression: Traditional ranging approaches and error mitigation tasks gen-
                                 erally view multipath and NLoS reflections as impairments to be removed. In this
                                 paradigm, ML models are trained to recover the first-path arrival or compensate for
                                 the resulting positive bias, treating reflections as unwanted noise [71,179].


                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                               38 of 56




                            Multipath Exploitation: Conversely, positioning and fingerprinting tasks increasingly
                                 leverage multipath components as valuable spatial features. In this paradigm, the
                                 rich structure of the full CIR, including delayed reflections, is interpreted as a location-
                                 dependent signature (e.g., utilizing reflections as virtual anchors), allowing DL mod-
                                 els to capture complex dependencies that correlate with specific coordinates [96,142].

                                 From an engineering perspective, the choice between suppression and exploitation
                            depends on deployment constraints. While suppression is more compatible with existing
                            geometric infrastructures (Pipeline a), exploitation via CIR-based fingerprinting (Pipeline c)
                            offers superior robustness in sparse anchor deployments, albeit at the cost of higher model
                            complexity and site-specific training.
                                 Finally, while geometric multilateration remains the dominant approach, the emer-
                            gence of direct position estimation frameworks capable of mapping signal features directly
                            to coordinates suggests a promising direction to reduce cumulative error propagation and
                            improve the overall resilience of IPSs.

                            6.3. RQ2. Which ML Algorithms Are Most Commonly Applied to These Tasks, and What
                            Motivations or Advantages Are Reported in the Literature to Justify Their Use?
                                  DNNs, particularly CNNs and hybrid CNN-LSTM architectures, are the most frequent
                            models applied in UWB-based positioning pipelines. They are followed by AEs, MLPs,
                            and classical algorithms such as RFs, SVMs, GMMs, and Naïve Bayes classifiers. CNNs are
                            widely used for extracting spatial and temporal features from CIR data, while LSTM vari-
                            ants are employed when sequential dependencies are relevant. AEs and GAN-based models
                            are increasingly adopted for feature compression and synthetic data generation. Authors
                            typically justify their use based on the accuracy improvements and robustness achieved
                            under multipath and NLoS conditions, although aspects such as model interpretability, com-
                            putational complexity, and hardware feasibility are often overlooked. Transformer-based
                            architectures have started to appear and show significant potential for unified spatial–
                            temporal representation learning, although their adoption is still limited by computational
                            costs and the scarcity of large annotated datasets.
                                  While DL dominates the current landscape, the field remains in an exploratory stage
                            where model selection is often empirical rather than guided by systematic benchmark-
                            ing. To assist practitioners, Table 13 aggregates performance ranges segregated into two
                            domains: Accuracy for classification and RMSE for regression (ranging/positioning).
                                  The data, derived from the experimental results of the 169 analyzed papers, indicates
                            a clear trade-off between accuracy and complexity. DL models (specifically CNNs and
                            LSTMs) consistently achieve state-of-the-art accuracy, particularly in complex NLoS clas-
                            sification and dynamic tracking (RMSE < 15 cm). However, classical models like SVMs
                            and RFs remain highly competitive, often reaching accuracies above 95% with significantly
                            lower computational latency, offering a balanced trade-off for embedded applications.




                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                       39 of 56




                                   Table 13. Summary of typical performance ranges and application suitability for key ML algorithms
                                   in UWB positioning (2020–2024). Bold face indicates the overall best performance achieved for each
                                   major task.

 Task                       Algorithm                       Observed Performance               Best Suited For
                            CNN/ResNet/TCN                  Acc: 82.6–100.0% [38,45]           High-end hardware, raw CIR inputs.
                            Hybrid (CNN–LSTM)               Acc: 82.2–98.5% [58,150]           Spatio-temporal signal dynamics.
 Channel
                            SVM/Naïve Bayes                 Acc: 78.3–99.8% [41,61]            Low-power MCUs, small datasets.
 Classification
                                                                                               Robust handcrafted feature classifi-
                            Tree-based (RF/XGBoost)         Acc: 82.8–99.5% [164,176]
                                                                                               cation.
                                                                                               Global context and deep feature
                            Transformers/DNN                Acc: 81.4–100.0% [54,158]
                                                                                               learning.
                            AE/VAE                          RMSE: 0.103–0.600 m [36,103]       Unsupervised noise removal.
                            Deep Regressors                 RMSE: 0.001–0.367 m [6,63]         High-precision bias correction.
 Error Mitigation                                                                              GMM, GPR, or GP probabilistic mod-
                            Classical/Prob.                 RMSE: 0.001–0.545 m [67,100]
                                                                                               eling.
                            Ensemble Methods                RMSE: 0.022–0.624 m [11,108]       Robust feature-based regression.
                                                                                               Selection of LoS/NLoS measure-
                            Clustering                      RMSE: 0.017–0.555 m [65,101]
                                                                                               ments.
                                                                                               Dynamic tracking and trajectory
                            LSTM/GRU                        RMSE: 0.008–0.139 m [113,120]
                                                                                               smoothing.
 Position Estimation
                                                                                               Snapshot positioning and complex
                            Direct CNN/DNN                  RMSE: 0.009–0.204 m [125,133]
                                                                                               mapping.
                                                                                               Static or resource-constrained de-
                            Classical/Hybrid                RMSE: 0.020–3.342 m [108,110]
                                                                                               ployments.


                                   Performance Comparison: ML vs. Classical Baselines
                                        A critical motivation for adopting ML identified in this review lies in its ability to over-
                                   come the systematic limitations of classical estimators. While classical analytical models
                                   dominate in clean LoS environments due to their predictability and low computational
                                   cost, the literature consistently reports that ML provides measurable advantages when
                                   geometric assumptions fail.
                                        Quantitative comparisons indicate that chip-integrated LDE algorithms degrade
                                   severely under NLoS conditions, as the FP is often attenuated below the detection threshold.
                                   Learning-based regressors operating on raw CIR data exploit multipath structure rather
                                   than suppressing it, achieving ranging error reductions between 20–35% compared to
                                   standard LDE in unseen test conditions [92,185]. Unlike polynomial bias models, which are
                                   often restricted to specific antenna orientations, ML models demonstrate superior capacity
                                   to learn orientation-invariant feature representations.
                                        Regarding angular estimation, classical super-resolution methods such as Multiple
                                   Signal Classification (MUSIC) or Estimation of Signal Parameters via Rotational Invariance
                                   Techniques (ESPRIT) suffer from a loss of subspace orthogonality in dense multipath
                                   environments. Recent studies demonstrate that DL models improve robustness by acting
                                   as a pre-processing denoiser or feature enhancer, restoring the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)
                                   required for MUSIC to operate reliably [137,146].
                                        Finally, a clear distinction emerges in tracking tasks. Pure sequence-based models (e.g.,
                                   LSTM) can outperform classical EKF solutions during momentary signal outages or severe
                                   IMU drift [99]. However, hybrid architectures, where ML dynamically adapts the EKF
                                   noise covariance matrix (Q and R tuning), consistently provide the best trade-off between
                                   accuracy, stability, and generalization [58].




                                                                                             https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                            40 of 56




                            6.4. RQ3. How Are ML-Based UWB Positioning Methods Evaluated in Terms of Experimental
                            Design, Performance Metrics, Validation Procedures, and Reproducibility?
                                  The evaluation of ML-based UWB systems remains highly heterogeneous. Most stud-
                            ies assess performance using task-specific metrics: RMSE and MAE for regression (ranging
                            and positioning), and Accuracy, Precision, Recall, or F1-score for channel classification. A
                            smaller subset of works includes computational complexity and latency, which are critical
                            for real-time feasibility. Experimental setups are predominantly restricted to small-scale
                            indoor environments (<15 m2 ), such as offices or laboratories, typically employing four
                            to six anchors. The prevalence of ad hoc datasets and the lack of standardized reporting
                            formats hinder reproducibility and cross-study comparability. Currently, only a minority of
                            studies explicitly adhere to recognized benchmarking frameworks such as the International
                            Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
                            18305 standard.
                                  Despite these inconsistencies, the literature consistently reports that ML modules
                            provide a measurable advantage over conventional geometric filters, reducing ranging
                            errors by approximately 20–50% and improving classification accuracy by 5–10 percentage
                            points. However, the magnitude of these gains varies substantially across environments,
                            reinforcing the need for unified benchmarking protocols (see Table 11).

                            6.4.1. Industrial Standards Compatibility
                                  ML methods applied to UWB-based localization are not standardized as standalone
                            algorithms. Instead, they operate as enhancement layers for hardware that complies
                            with strict industrial standards. Adherence to these standards is essential for commercial
                            viability. At the physical layer, the IEEE 802.15.4 family remains the normative foundation.
                            The majority of reviewed studies rely on CIR samples or ToF estimates generated according
                            to these specifications. Furthermore, the IEEE 802.15.4a channel models (CM1–CM8) are
                            vital for standardized simulation and pre-training. A summary of these industrial standards
                            and their specific implications for ML methods is provided in Table 14.
                                  At the physical and medium access layers, the IEEE 802.15.4 family constitutes the
                            normative foundation. The majority of reviewed studies rely on CIR samples, ToF esti-
                            mates, or phase information generated according to IEEE 802.15.4 specifications. As a
                            consequence, ML models are implicitly constrained by standardized PHY parameters such
                            as preamble length and timestamping resolution. Furthermore, the IEEE 802.15.4a Channel
                            Models (CM1–CM8) play a crucial role in ML research, enabling standardized simulation
                            of multipath propagation for pre-training deep networks.
                                  Recent amendments, notably IEEE 802.15.4z, introduce security features like the
                            Scrambled Timestamp Sequence (STS). From an ML perspective, these are particularly rele-
                            vant for trustworthiness assessment and spoofing detection. Interoperability frameworks,
                            such as the Fine Ranging (FiRa) Consortium, ensure cross-vendor compatibility where
                            ML-based NLoS detection can be integrated as a post-processing module within certified
                            stacks. Additionally, performance requirements from the 3GPP (for 5G/IoT positioning)
                            and regulatory limits from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)/European
                            Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) (on power spectral density) dictate the
                            low-SNR conditions under which ML models must remain robust.




                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                        41 of 56




                                     Table 14. Relevant industrial standards and their implications for ML-based UWB localization.

 Standard                   Scope                 Implications for ML Methods
 IEEE 802.15.4/4a           PHY/Channel models    Standardized CIR structure and propagation models for training.
 IEEE 802.15.4z             Secure ranging        Introduces STS and PDoA, enabling ML-based security assessment.
 FiRa Consortium            Interoperability      Ensures compatibility; ML acts as a post-processing enhancement.
 3GPP                       Requirements          Defines accuracy and latency targets for 5G and IoT localization.
 FCC/ETSI                   Regulation            Imposes PSD limits, requiring models robust to low-SNR.


                                     6.4.2. Temporal Dynamics and Sequential Modeling
                                          A significant trend identified in this review is the increasing reliance on sequential
                                     models to capture the temporal dynamics of user motion and channel evolution. Un-
                                     like static models, these architectures maintain an internal state, allowing the system to
                                     distinguish transient NLoS spikes from plausible movement. While LSTMs and GRUs
                                     remain the standard for modeling temporal dependencies in trajectories [99,113], the state
                                     of the art is transitioning toward Transformer-based architectures. These models excel at
                                     capturing long-range dependencies and global context from raw CIRs, often outperforming
                                     convolutional baselines in complex industrial environments [54,167].

                                     6.5. RQ4. What Public Datasets or Benchmarks Are Available for Combining UWB and ML, and
                                     How Are They Used to Improve the Reproducibility and Comparability of Results?
                                          The review reveals that publicly available datasets for UWB-ML research remains
                                    scarce, significantly limiting reproducibility and cross-comparison across studies. Existing
                                    benchmarks (summarized in Table 12) provide valuable resources for channel classification
                                    and range-error mitigation, covering diverse raw data modalities (e.g., amplitude vs.
                                    complex IQ CIRs), anchor densities, and ground-truth methodologies. However, their
                                    scope and scale remain limited compared to the environmental variability found in real-
                                    world industrial deployments. Most studies continue to rely on proprietary or small-scale
                                    data, restricting progress toward standardized evaluation. This imbalance between private
                                    and public datasets likely explains the inconsistencies observed in reported performance
                                    and the limited generalizability of current ML-based UWB positioning methods.
                                          The scarcity of public datasets identified in this review represents more than a simple
                                    lack of resources; it is a fundamental barrier to the maturation of the field. Without
                                    standardized, multi-environment benchmarks, the community cannot effectively address
                                    the site-specificity problem. Most reviewed models are validated on data collected in a
                                    single laboratory or office, making it impossible to determine if the reported centimeter-
                                    level accuracy is a result of a robust model architecture or simply the result of overfitting to
                                    the local multipath profile. Future progress in the field will depend on the adoption of open-
                                    science practices, where authors release raw CIRs alongside their coordinate ground-truth
                                    to enable transparent and replicable research.

                                     6.6. RQ5. What Are the Main Challenges, Limitations, and Open Issues Identified in Applying ML
                                     to UWB-Based Indoor Positioning, and What Directions for Future Research Are Suggested?
                                          The review identifies four major categories of challenges: signal-related issues (multi-
                                     path and NLoS), data limitations (scarcity and imbalance), generalization problems (site-
                                     specificity), and deployment constraints. While the first three are intrinsic to the physics
                                     of UWB or the training process, the latter represents a decisive engineering barrier for
                                     real-world adoption.




                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                             42 of 56




                            6.6.1. Computational Constraints and Deployment Feasibility
                                 The reviewed literature reveals a clear gap between algorithmic performance and
                            deployment feasibility on resource-constrained edge devices. These limitations can be
                            categorized into algorithmic complexity and hardware constraints:
                            •    Algorithmic Complexity: The computational cost, expressed in Floating-Point Op-
                                 erations (FLOPs) and parameter count, directly dictates latency. Deep architectures
                                 such as stacked LSTMs typically require orders of magnitude more operations than
                                 lightweight CNNs. Comparative analyses show that an LSTM-based model may require
                                 10–15 MFLOPs per inference, whereas a compact CNN can operate below 1 MFLOP
                                 under similar conditions, enabling high-rate tracking on standard microcontrollers.
                            •    Feature Extraction Bottleneck: Processing the full raw CIR often dominates latency.
                                 Extracting complex handcrafted features can take tens of milliseconds on low-power
                                 MCUs, whereas reducing the CIR window or using learned embeddings allows for
                                 sub-millisecond execution.
                            •    Hardware and Memory: Unoptimized DL models often exceed the flash/RAM bud-
                                 gets of Cortex-M class microcontrollers. Studies demonstrate that quantization (FP32
                                 to INT8) is essential, reducing memory footprints by nearly an order of magnitude
                                 with minimal accuracy loss.
                            •    Energy Efficiency: Executing deep models on general-purpose Central Processing
                                 Units (CPUs) is energy-intensive. Hardware acceleration using Field-Programmable
                                 Gate Arrays (FPGAs) or dedicated edge Artificial Intelligence (AI) accelerators
                                 (e.g., Edge Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)) has been reported to reduce energy per
                                 inference by more than 10× compared to software-based execution.

                            6.6.2. Security, Privacy, and Adversarial Robustness
                                  While the primary focus of the reviewed literature is the mitigation of natural environ-
                            mental errors, the integration of ML into UWB systems also raises critical considerations
                            regarding security. Insufficient cyber–physical security can compromise localization accu-
                            racy to a degree comparable to severe propagation impairments.
                                  A limited number of studies explicitly address such threats. For instance, Peterseil et
                            al. [83] highlight the vulnerability of UWB to physical-layer attacks such as Cicada (preamble
                            manipulation), proposing ML-based AEs to derive a trustworthiness score. Similarly, Botler
                            et al. [76] investigate distance enlargement fraud, demonstrating that hybrid frameworks
                            combining ToF and RSS can enforce geometric constraints to detect spoofing.
                                  Crucially, the emergence of the IEEE 802.15.4z standard, which introduces the STS,
                            provides a critical hardware-level defense. Future research must ensure that ML-based
                            modules are aware of these security features; otherwise, unconstrained learning models
                            might inadvertently "correct" (and thus validate) signal distortions caused by malicious
                            distance-bounding violations, mistaking them for natural multipath effects.
                                  Regarding privacy, the adoption of edge computing, discussed in Section 6.6.1, offers
                            inherent advantages. Processing UWB data locally on embedded devices [28,32] reduces
                            the need to transmit sensitive raw channel information to external servers, supporting
                            privacy-by-design principles.

                            6.6.3. Future Research Roadmap
                                The next stage of progress will depend on bridging the gap between algorithmic
                            innovation and system-level integration. Future research should prioritize:
                            1.   Hybrid Physics–ML Architectures: Combining analytical propagation models with
                                 data-driven inference to improve interpretability.




                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                            43 of 56




                            2.   Robust Feature Extraction: Developing orientation-invariant features that survive the
                                 move from laboratory to industrial environments.
                            3.   Decentralized Learning: Utilizing DA, TL, and Federated Learning (FL) to improve
                                 generalization while ensuring privacy compliance.

                            6.7. Overall Discussion and Implications
                                 Across all RQs, the review reveals a transition from handcrafted modeling toward
                            data-driven learning in UWB indoor positioning. ML techniques have proven effective
                            in mitigating ranging bias, improving classification accuracy, and enhancing overall ro-
                            bustness; however, reproducibility, dataset standardization, and scalability remain the
                            primary open challenges. The integration of ML into UWB positioning is still fragmented
                            across isolated tasks, but the growing convergence toward hybrid and fully integrated
                            frameworks indicates a maturing research field.
                                 Future progress will rely on the availability of unified open datasets, standardized
                            evaluation protocols, and efficient models capable of balancing accuracy, latency, and
                            energy constraints, ultimately enabling scalable, adaptive, and interoperable IPSs.
                                 This momentum continues into 2025, validating the Actionable Research Roadmap
                            proposed in Section 5.6.2. Very recent studies confirm the shift toward Transformer-based
                            architectures for global temporal modeling [200] and deep sensor fusion using advanced
                            recurrent units for industrial tracking [201]. Furthermore, the push for generalization is
                            actively being addressed through DA frameworks such as AdaLoS [202], while the demand
                            for edge efficiency has led to novel lightweight architectures such as LightMamba [203],
                            which optimizes state-space modeling for resource-constrained devices. These contribu-
                            tions underscore that the field is rapidly evolving from static accuracy improvements
                            toward more robust, efficient, and context-aware localization systems.

                            7. Conclusions
                                  This comprehensive review provides a synthesis of the role of ML in UWB-based
                            IPS technologies, analyzing 169 primary studies through the PRISMA framework. Our
                            findings demonstrate that ML has become a fundamental tool for enhancing positioning
                            accuracy and robustness, primarily by mitigating multipath and NLoS effects through
                            channel classification and ranging bias correction. The transition from classical models
                            like SVM and RF toward deep architectures, particularly CNNs and hybrid CNN-LSTMs,
                            underscores a growing capacity to model the complex, nonlinear behavior of the UWB
                            channel impulse response. Despite these technical gains, the review highlights significant
                            gaps in evaluation consistency and data standardization, where the reliance on site-specific,
                            private datasets remains a decisive barrier to the reproducibility and industrial scalability
                            of the proposed solutions.
                                  To bridge these gaps, the path for future research should transition from generic
                            exploration toward specific, actionable objectives. Our proposed roadmap emphasizes
                            four strategic areas: advanced generative preprocessing for dataset balancing, semantic
                            classification through domain adaptation to improve generalization, probabilistic error
                            mitigation for uncertainty quantification, and the adoption of next-generation architectures
                            like GNNs and Transformers. Furthermore, the push for edge efficiency and the design
                            of lightweight networks optimized for real-time embedded processing, alongside the
                            integration of adversarial-aware security features, are critical for the practical deployment
                            of dependable UWB systems. By consolidating the fragmented literature into a unified
                            analytical framework, this study establishes a reproducible baseline that clarifies current
                            methodological choices and provides a clear direction toward robust, efficient, and context-
                            aware indoor positioning solutions.



                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                           44 of 56




                            Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://www.
                            mdpi.com/article/10.3390/electronics15010181/s1. Table S1: PRISMA 2020 Checklist.

                            Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C.S.-P. and J.T.-S.; methodology, J.C.S.-P., R.B., I.M., C.R.
                            and J.T.-S.; validation, J.C.S.-P.; R.B., and C.R.; formal analysis, J.C.S.-P., C.R., and J.T.-S.; investigation,
                            J.C.S.-P.; resources, J.C.S.-P., R.B., and C.R.; writing—original draft preparation, J.C.S.-P.; writing—
                            review and editing, R.B., C.R., I.M., and J.T.-S.; visualization, J.C.S.-P.; supervision, R.B., C.R. and
                            J.T.-S.; project administration, J.T.-S.; funding acquisition, J.T.-S. All authors have read and agreed to
                            the published version of the manuscript.

                            Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from Generalitat Valenciana (CIDEXG/2023/17,
                            Conselleria d’Educació, Universitats i Ocupació).

                            Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

                            Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

                            Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.

                            Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                            of this study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
                            in the decision to publish the results.

                            Appendix A. List of Acronyms
                                  The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

                            3GPP           3rd Generation Partnership Project

                            AI             Artificial Intelligence

                            AE             Autoencoder

                            ANN            Artificial Neural Network

                            AoA            Angle of Arrival

                            AR             Augmented Reality

                            ARM            Advanced RISC Machine

                            AUC            Area Under the Curve

                            BERT           Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers

                            BiLSTM         Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory

                            BLE            Bluetooth Low Energy

                            BN             Batch Normalization

                            CDF            Cumulative Distribution Function

                            CIR            Channel Impulse Response

                            CNN            Convolutional Neural Network

                            Conv           Convolutional

                            CPU            Central Processing Unit

                            DA             Domain Adaptation

                            DANN           Domain Adversarial Neural Network


                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                      45 of 56




                            DBN      Deep Belief Network

                            DL       Deep Learning

                            DNN      Deep Neural Network

                            DS-TWR   Double-Sided Two-Way Ranging

                            DT       Decision Tree

                            EC       Exclusion Criteria

                            EKF      Extended Kalman Filter

                            ESPRIT   Estimation of Signal Parameters via Rotational Invariance Techniques

                            ETSI     European Telecommunications Standards Institute

                            FC       Fully Connected

                            FCC      Federal Communications Commission

                            FCM      Fuzzy C-Means

                            FCN      Fully Convolutional Network

                            FiRa     Fine Ranging

                            FL       Federated Learning

                            FLOP     Floating-Point Operation

                            FP       First-Path

                            FPGA     Field-Programmable Gate Array

                            GAF      Gramian Angular Field

                            GAN      Generative Adversarial Network

                            GAT      Graph Attention Network

                            GBDT     Gradient Boosted Decision Tree

                            GBRT     Gradient Boosted Regression Trees

                            GCN      Graph Convolutional Network

                            GM       Gray Model

                            GMM      Gaussian Mixture Model

                            GNN      Graph Neural Network

                            GPR      Gaussian Process Regression

                            GPS      Global Positioning System

                            GRU      Gated Recurrent Unit

                            HQCNN    Hybrid Quantum Convolutional Neural Network

                            IC       Inclusion Criteria

                            IEC      International Electrotechnical Commission


                                                                            https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                           46 of 56




                            IEEE       Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

                            IMU        Inertial Measurement Unit

                            IoT        Internet of Things

                            IPS        Indoor Positioning System

                            IQ         In-phase and Quadrature

                            ISO        International Organization for Standardization

                            ISODATA Iterative Self-Organizing Data Analysis Technique Algorithm

                            kNN        k-Nearest Neighbors

                            LDE        Leading-Edge Detection

                            LED        Light-Emitting Diode

                            LiDAR      Light Detection and Ranging

                            LightGBM Light Gradient Boosting Machine

                            LoS        Line-of-Sight

                            LSTM       Long Short-Term Memory

                            MAE        Mean Absolute Error

                            MaxPool    Maximum Pooling

                            MCU        Microcontroller Unit

                            MI         Magneto-Inductive

                            ML         Machine Learning

                            MLP        Multilayer Perceptron

                            MRQ        Main Research Question

                            MUSIC      Multiple Signal Classification

                            NLoS       Non-Line-of-Sight

                            PDoA       Phase Difference of Arrival

                            PRISMA     Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses

                            PSD        Power Spectral Density

                            RAM        Random Access Memory

                            REMNet     Residual Enhancement Multiscale Network

                            ResNet     Residual Network

                            RF         Random Forest

                            RIS        Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface

                            RMSE       Root Mean Square Error

                            RMS        Root Mean Square


                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                          47 of 56




                            RNN       Recurrent Neural Network

                            ROC       Receiver Operating Characteristic

                            RQ        Research Question

                            RSS       Received Signal Strength

                            SINR      Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio

                            SLIPT     Simultaneous Lightwave Information and Power Transfer

                            SNR       Signal-to-Noise Ratio

                            STD       Standard Deviation

                            STS       Scrambled Timestamp Sequence

                            SVGP      Stochastic Variational Gaussian Process

                            SVM       Support Vector Machine

                            SVR       Support Vector Regression

                            TCN       Temporal Convolutional Network

                            TDoA      Time Difference of Arrival

                            TinyML    Tiny Machine Learning

                            TL        Transfer Learning

                            ToA       Time of Arrival

                            ToF       Time-of-Flight

                            TPU       Tensor Processing Unit

                            TWR       Two-Way Ranging

                            UKF       Unscented Kalman Filter

                            UWB       Ultra-Wideband

                            VAE       Variational Autoencoder

                            VBGMM     Variational Bayesian Gaussian Mixture Model

                            VLC       Visible Light Communication

                            VRNN      Variational Recurrent Neural Network

                            WLS       Weighted Least Squares

                            WLoS      Weak Line-of-Sight

                            WoS       Web of Science

                            XGBoost   Extreme Gradient Boosting




                                                                                https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                            48 of 56




References
1.    Flueratoru, L.; Wehrli, S.; Magno, M.; Lohan, E.S.; Niculescu, D. High-accuracy ranging and localization with ultrawideband
      communications for energy-constrained devices. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021, 9, 7463–7480.
2.    Dabove, P.; Di Pietra, V.; Piras, M.; Jabbar, A.A.; Kazim, S.A. Indoor positioning using Ultra-wide band (UWB) technologies:
      Positioning accuracies and sensors’ performances. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ION Position, Location and Navigation
      Symposium (PLANS), Monterey, CA, USA, 23–26 April 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018; 2018; pp. 175–184.
3.    Bastiaens, S.; Vanhie-Van Gerwen, J.; Macoir, N.; Deprez, K.; De Cock, C.; Joseph, W.; De Poorter, E.; Plets, D. Experimental
      benchmarking of next-gen indoor positioning technologies (unmodulated) visible light positioning and ultra-wideband. IEEE
      Internet Things J. 2022, 9, 17858–17870.
4.    Zhao, M.; Chang, T.; Arun, A.; Ayyalasomayajula, R.; Zhang, C.; Bharadia, D. Uloc: Low-power, scalable and cm-accurate
      UWB-tag localization and tracking for indoor applications. Proc. ACM Interactive Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 2021, 5, 1–31.
5.    Yang, X.; Wang, J.; Song, D.; Feng, B.; Ye, H. A novel NLoS error compensation method based IMU for UWB indoor positioning
      system. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21, 11203–11212.
6.    Chen, Y.Y.; Huang, S.P.; Wu, T.W.; Tsai, W.T.; Liou, C.Y.; Mao, S.G. UWB system for indoor positioning and tracking with arbitrary
      target orientation, optimal anchor location, and adaptive NLoS mitigation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2020, 69, 9304–9314.
7.    Feng, D.; Peng, J.; Zhuang, Y.; Guo, C.; Zhang, T.; Chu, Y.; Zhou, X.; Xia, X.G. An adaptive IMU/UWB fusion method for NLoS
      indoor positioning and navigation. IEEE Internet Things J. 2023, 10, 11414–11428.
8.    Olejniczak, A.; Blaszkiewicz, O.; Cwalina, K.K.; Rajchowski, P.; Sadowski, J. Deep learning approach for LoS and NLoS
      identification in the indoor environment. In Proceedings of the 2020 Baltic URSI Symposium (URSI), Warsaw, Poland, 5–8 October
      2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 104–107.
9.    Fontaine, J.; Van Herbruggen, B.; Shahid, A.; Kram, S.; Stahlke, M.; De Poorter, E. Ultra wideband (UWB) localization using active
      CIR-based fingerprinting. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2023, 27, 1322–1326.
10.   Li, C.; Tanghe, E.; Fontaine, J.; Martens, L.; Romme, J.; Singh, G.; De Poorter, E.; Joseph, W. Multistatic UWB radar-based passive
      human tracking using COTS devices. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 2022, 21, 695–699.
11.   Margiani, T.; Cortesi, S.; Keller, M.; Vogt, C.; Polonelli, T.; Magno, M. Angle of arrival and centimeter distance estimation on a
      smart UWB sensor node. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2023, 72, 9508110.
12.   Zafari, F.; Gkelias, A.; Leung, K.K. A survey of indoor localization systems and technologies. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2019,
      21, 2568–2599.
13.   Mendoza-Silva, G.M.; Torres-Sospedra, J.; Huerta, J. A meta-review of indoor positioning systems. Sensors 2019, 19, 4507.
14.   Chowdhury, M.Z.; Joha, M.I.; Rahman, M.M.; Kabir, M.S.; Jang, Y.M. Machine learning and deep learning in VLC systems: A
      comprehensive survey. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2025, 6, 7955–8006.
15.   Palitharathna, K.W.; Wickramasinghe, N.D.; Vegni, A.M.; Suraweera, H.A. Neural network-based optimization for SLIPT-enabled
      indoor VLC systems with energy constraints. IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw. 2023, 8, 839–851.
16.   Nessa, A.; Adhikari, B.; Hussain, F.; Fernando, X.N. A survey of machine learning for indoor positioning. IEEE Access 2020,
      8, 214945–214965.
17.   Santra, A.; Wang, P.; Shaker, G.; Mysore, B.S.; Dolmans, G.; Chen, Y.; Shariati, N.; Pandharipande, A. Machine Learning-Powered
      Radio Frequency Sensing: A Review. IEEE Sens. J. 2025, 25, 23164–23183.
18.   Fischer, G.K.; Schaechtle, T.; Gabbrielli, A.; Bordoy, J.; Häring, I.; Höflinger, F.; Rupitsch, S.J. A Systematic Survey and
      Comparative Analysis of Angular-Based Indoor Localization and Positioning Technologies. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2025,
      doi:10.1109/COMST.2025.3567765.
19.   Umer, A.; Müürsepp, I.; Alam, M.M.; Wymeersch, H. Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces in 6g radio localization: A survey of
      recent developments, opportunities, and challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2025, 27, 3526–3560.
20.   Alarifi, A.; Al-Salman, A.; Alsaleh, M.; Alnafessah, A.; Al-Hadhrami, S.; Al-Ammar, M.A.; Al-Khalifa, H.S. Ultra wideband
      indoor positioning technologies: Analysis and recent advances. Sensors 2016, 16, 707.
21.   Mazhar, F.; Khan, M.G.; Sällberg, B. Precise indoor positioning using UWB: A review of methods, algorithms and implementations.
      Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2017, 97, 4467–4491.
22.   Ridolfi, M.; Kaya, A.; Berkvens, R.; Weyn, M.; Joseph, W.; Poorter, E.D. Self-calibration and collaborative localization for UWB
      positioning systems: A survey and future research directions. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2021, 54, 1–27.
23.   Elsanhoury, M.; Mäkelä, P.; Koljonen, J.; Välisuo, P.; Shamsuzzoha, A.; Mantere, T.; Elmusrati, M.; Kuusniemi, H. Precision positioning
      for smart logistics using ultra-wideband technology-based indoor navigation: A review. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 44413–44445.
24.   Wang, F.; Tang, H.; Chen, J. Survey on NLoS identification and error mitigation for UWB indoor positioning. Electronics 2023,
      12, 1678.
25.   Hapsari, G.I.; Munadi, R.; Erfianto, B.; Irawati, I.D. Future research and trends in ultra-wideband indoor tag localization. IEEE
      Access 2024, 13, 21827–21852.




                                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                           49 of 56




26.   Al-Okby, M.F.R.; Junginger, S.; Roddelkopf, T.; Thurow, K. UWB-based real-time indoor positioning systems: A comprehensive
      review. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 11005.
27.   Page, M.J.; McKenzie, J.E.; Bossuyt, P.M.; Boutron, I.; Hoffmann, T.C.; Mulrow, C.D.; Shamseer, L.; Tetzlaff, J.M.; Akl, E.A.;
      Brennan, S.E.; et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021, 372, n71.
28.   Fontaine, J.; Ridolfi, M.; Van Herbruggen, B.; Shahid, A.; De Poorter, E. Edge inference for UWB ranging error correction using
      autoencoders. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 139143–139155.
29.   Guo, H.; Yin, H.; Song, S.; Zhu, X.; Ren, D. Application of density clustering with noise combined with particle swarm
      optimization in UWB indoor positioning. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 13121.
30.   Jiang, C.; Chen, S.; Chen, Y.; Liu, D.; Bo, Y. An UWB channel impulse response de-noising method for NLoS/LoS classification
      boosting. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2020, 24, 2513–2517.
31.   Stahlke, M.; Kram, S.; Mutschler, C.; Mahr, T. NLoS Detection using UWB Channel Impulse Responses and Convolutional Neural
      Networks. In Proceedings of the ICL-GNSS, Tampere, Finland, 2–4 June 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 1–6.
32.   Capra, M.; Sapienza, S.; Motto Ros, P.; Serrani, A.; Martina, M.; Puiatti, A.; Bonato, P.; Demarchi, D. Assessing the feasibility of
      augmenting fall detection systems by relying on UWB-based position tracking and a home robot. Sensors 2020, 20, 5361.
33.   Li, B.; Zhao, K.; Sandoval, E.B. A UWB-based indoor positioning system employing neural networks. J. Geovisualization Spat.
      Anal. 2020, 4, 18.
34.   Wang, T.; Hu, K.; Li, Z.; Lin, K.; Wang, J.; Shen, Y. A semi-supervised learning approach for UWB ranging error mitigation. IEEE
      Wirel. Commun. Lett. 2020, 10, 688–691.
35.   Flueratoru, L.; Lohan, E.S.; Niculescu, D. Self-learning detection and mitigation of non-line-of-sight measurements in ultra-
      wideband localization. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
      Lloret de Mar, Spain, 29 November–2 December 2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1–8.
36.   Stahlke, M.; Kram, S.; Ott, F.; Feigl, T.; Mutschler, C. Estimating TOA reliability with variational autoencoders. IEEE Sens. J. 2021,
      22, 5133–5140.
37.   Shalihan, M.; Liu, R.; Yuen, C. NLoS ranging mitigation with neural network model for UWB localization. In Proceedings of the
      2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), Mexico City, Mexico, 20–24 August
      2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1370–1376.
38.   Deng, X.; Ping, Z.; Sun, R. UWB NLoS recognition based on improved convolutional neural network assisted by wavelet analysis
      and gramian angular field. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 16384–16392.
39.   Rayavarapu, V.C.S.R.; Mahapatro, A. NLoS identification and mitigation in UWB positioning with bagging-based ensembled
      classifiers. Ann. Telecommun. 2022, 77, 267–280.
40.   Che, F.; Ahmed, A.; Ahmed, Q.Z.; Zaidi, S.A.R.; Shakir, M.Z. Machine learning based approach for indoor localization using
      ultra-wide bandwidth (UWB) system for industrial internet of things (IIoT). In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference
      on UK-China Emerging Technologies (UCET), Glasgow, UK, 20–21 August 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 1–4.
41.   Che, F.; Ahmed, Q.Z.; Khan, F.A.; Khan, F.A. Novel fine-tuned attribute weighted Naïve Bayes NLoS classifier for UWB
      positioning. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2023, 27, 1130–1134.
42.   Liu, M.; Lou, X.; Jin, X.; Jiang, R.; Ye, K.; Wang, S. NLoS Identification for Localization Based on the Application of UWB. Wirel.
      Pers. Commun. 2021, 119, 3651–3670.
43.   Yoon, J.; Kim, H.; Seo, D.; Nam, H. Performance comparison of NLoS detection methods in UWB. In Proceedings of the 2021
      International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC),Jeju Island, Republic of Korea,
      20–22 October 2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1486–1489.
44.   Ferreira, A.G.; Fernandes, D.; Branco, S.; Catarino, A.P.; Monteiro, J.L. Feature selection for real-time NLoS identification and
      mitigation for body-mounted UWB transceivers. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2021, 70, 5502310.
45.   Nam, S.C.; Choi, H.B.; Ko, Y.B. On mitigation of ranging errors for through-the-body NLoS conditions using convolutional
      neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2022 24th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT),
      PyeongChang Kwangwoon_Do, Republic of Korea, 13–16 February 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 141–144.
46.   Gao, Z.; Jiao, Y.; Yang, W.; Li, X.; Wang, Y. A method for UWB localization based on CNN-SVM and hybrid locating algorithm.
      Information 2023, 14, 46.
47.   Dong, M.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, Y. Multi-classification of ultra-wideband non-line-of-sight ranging signals using deep learning. In
      Proceedings of the 2023 5th International Conference on Intelligent Control, Measurement and Signal Processing (ICMSP),
      Chengdu, China, 19–21 May 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 937–941.
48.   Tran, D.H.; Chung, B.; Jang, Y.M. GAN-based data augmentation for UWB NLoS identification using machine learning. In
      Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC), Jeju
      Island, Republic of Korea, 21–24 February 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 417–420.
49.   Yu, X.; Yang, F.; Yun, J.; Wu, S. CIRNN: An Ultra-Wideband Non-Line-of-Sight Signal Classifier Based on Deep-Learning. Tehnički
      vjesnik 2022, 29, 1139–1147.



                                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                         50 of 56




50.   Park, J.; Nam, S.; Choi, H.; Ko, Y.; Ko, Y.B. Improving deep learning-based UWB LoS/NLoS identification with transfer learning:
      An empirical approach. Electronics 2020, 9, 1714.
51.   Kong, Y.; Li, C.; Chen, Z.; Zhao, X. Recognition of blocking categories for UWB positioning in complex indoor environment.
      Sensors 2020, 20, 4178.
52.   Sang, C.L.; Steinhagen, B.; Homburg, J.D.; Adams, M.; Hesse, M.; Rückert, U. Identification of NLoS and multi-path conditions in
      UWB localization using machine learning methods. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 3980.
53.   Vales, V.B.; Domínguez-Bolaño, T.; Escudero, C.J.; Garcia-Naya, J.A. Using the power delay profile to accelerate the training
      of neural network-based classifiers for the identification of LoS and NLoS UWB propagation conditions. IEEE Access 2020,
      8, 220205–220214.
54.   Tomović, S.; Bregar, K.; Javornik, T.; Radusinović, I. Transformer-based NLoS detection in UWB localization systems. In
      Proceedings of the 2022 30th Telecommunications Forum (TELFOR), Belgrade, Serbia, 15–16 November 2022; IEEE: Piscataway,
      NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1–4.
55.   Wei, J.; Wang, H.; Su, S.; Tang, Y.; Guo, X.; Sun, X. NLoS identification using parallel deep learning model and time-frequency
      information in UWB-based positioning system. Measurement 2022, 195, 111191.
56.   Li, P.; Yan, Y.; Tan, Y.; Wang, H. A novel temporal convolutional network for NLoS identification of UWB signal. In Proceedings
      of the 2022 9th International Forum on Electrical Engineering and Automation (IFEEA), Zhuhai, China, 4–6 November 2022;
      IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 373–376.
57.   Schmelter, S.; Roehrig, C. Two staged ANN Based UWB ranging error mitigation for real time self localization on mobile robots.
      In Proceedings of the ISR Europe 2022; 54th International Symposium on Robotics, Munich, Germany, 20–21 June 2022; VDE:
      Berlin, Germany, 2022; pp. 1–7.
58.   Kim, D.H.; Farhad, A.; Pyun, J.Y. UWB positioning system based on LSTM classification with mitigated NLoS effects. IEEE
      Internet Things J. 2022, 10, 1822–1835.
59.   Jeong, S.G.; Do, Q.V.; Hwang, H.J.; Hasegawa, M.; Sekiya, H.; Hwang, W.J. Hybrid quantum convolutional neural networks for
      UWB signal classification. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 113726–113739.
60.   Jeong, S.G.; Do, Q.V.; Hwang, H.J.; Hasegawa, M.; Sekiya, H.; Hwang, W.J. UWB NLoS/LoS Classification Using Hybrid Quantum
      Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics-Asia
      (ICCE-Asia), Busan, Republic of Korea, 23–25 October 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 1–2.
61.   Ember, E.; Pestana, J.; Krisper, M.; Stocker, M.; Romer, K.; Boano, C.A.; Pelegrín, P.C. Impact of Feature Selection and CIR Window
      Length on NLoS Classification for UWB Systems. In Proceedings of the 2023 19th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing
      and Networking (MSN), Nanjing, China, 14–16 December 2023; IEEE Computer Society: Washington, DC, USA, 2023; pp. 72–80.
62.   Yang, H.; Wang, Y.; Xu, S.; Bi, J.; Jia, H.; Seow, C. Ultra-wideband ranging error mitigation with novel channel impulse response
      feature parameters and two-step non-line-of-sight identification. Sensors 2024, 24, 1703.
63.   Wang, Y.; Xu, S.; Cheng, S.; Zhang, X.; Zhou, M. A Localization Method Based on Multi-Area Selection and Error Compensation
      for Indoor Wireless Sensor Network. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2024, 71, 16327–16337.
64.   Sui, X.; Liao, B.; Wang, C.; Shi, Z. Improved XGBoost and GM UWB/MEME IMU positioning methods for non-line-of-sight
      environments. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 42384–42393.
65.   Guo, H.; Song, S.; Yin, H.; Ren, D.; Zhu, X. Optimization of UWB indoor positioning based on hardware accelerated Fuzzy
      ISODATA. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 17985.
66.   Wang, Y.; Fu, S.; Wang, F. Improved maximum correntropy criterion Kalman filter with adaptive behaviors for INS/UWB fusion
      positioning algorithm. Alex. Eng. J. 2024, 109, 702–714.
67.   Sagar, A.S.; Arefin, S.; Moon, E.; Prince, M.M.P.; Dang, L.M.; Haider, A.; Kim, H.S. A Gaussian Process-Enhanced Non-Linear
      Function and Bayesian Convolution–Bayesian Long Term Short Memory Based Ultra-Wideband Range Error Mitigation Method
      for Line of Sight and Non-Line of Sight Scenarios. Mathematics 2024, 12, 3866.
68.   Wang, F.; Shui, L.; Tang, H.; Wei, Z. Enhancing UWB Indoor Positioning Accuracy through Improved Snake Search Algorithm for
      NLoS/LoS Signal Classification. Sensors 2024, 24, 4917.
69.   Gao, D.; Zeng, X.; Wang, J.; Su, Y. Application of LSTM network to improve indoor positioning accuracy. Sensors 2020, 20, 5824.
70.   Cao, B.; Wang, S.; Ge, S.; Ma, X.; Liu, W. A novel mobile target localization approach for complicate underground environment in
      mixed LoS/NLoS scenarios. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 96347–96362.
71.   Angarano, S.; Mazzia, V.; Salvetti, F.; Fantin, G.; Chiaberge, M. Robust ultra-wideband range error mitigation with deep learning
      at the edge. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2021, 102, 104278.
72.   Krapež, P.; Munih, M. UWB-Radio Distance Measurements Error mitigation due to Tag Orientation in Localization Systems. In
      Proceedings of the 2021 20th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR), Ljubljana, Slovenia, 6–10 December 2021;
      IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 836–841.
73.   Long, K.; Nsalo Kong, D.F.; Zhang, K.; Tian, C.; Shen, C. A CSI-based indoor positioning system using single UWB ranging
      correction. Sensors 2021, 21, 6447.



                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                           51 of 56




74.   Angarano, S.; Salvetti, F.; Mazzia, V.; Fantin, G.; Gandini, D.; Chiaberge, M. Ultra-low-power range error mitigation for ultra-
      wideband precise localization. In Intelligent Computing, Proceedings of the Computing Conference (SAI) 2022, London, UK, 14–15
      July 2022; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022; 2022; pp. 814–824.
75.   Vollmer, F.; Graßhoff, J.; Rostalski, P. Probabilistic Ultra-Wideband TDoA Localization with Bias Correction. In Proceedings of the
      2022 30th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), Belgrade, Serbia, 29 August–2 September 2022; IEEE: Piscataway,
      NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1512–1516.
76.   Botler, L.; Diwold, K.; Römer, K. Improving signal-strength-based distance estimation in UWB transceivers. In Proceedings of the
      Proceedings of Cyber-Physical Systems and Internet of Things Week 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA, 9–12 May 2023; ACM: New
      York, NY, USA, 2023; pp. 61–66.
77.   Dai, P.; Wang, S.; Xu, T.; Li, M.; Gao, F.; Xing, J.; Yao, L. Efficient localization algorithm with UWB ranging error correction model
      based on genetic algorithm-ant colony optimization-backpropagation neural network. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 29906–29918.
78.   De Cock, C.; Tanghe, E.; Joseph, W.; Plets, D. Robust IMU-based mitigation of human body shadowing in UWB indoor positioning.
      Sensors 2023, 23, 8289.
79.   Deng, B.; Xu, T.; Yan, M. UWB NLoS identification and mitigation based on gramian angular field and parallel deep learning
      model. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 28513–28525.
80.   He, C.; Tang, Z. An UWB Positioning Algorithm Based on Clock Compensation and Filtering. In Proceedings of the 2023 Cross
      Strait Radio Science and Wireless Technology Conference (CSRSWTC), Guilin, China, 10–13 November 2023; IEEE: Piscataway,
      NJ, USA, 2023; 2023; pp. 1–3.
81.   Huang, Y.; Mazuelas, S.; Ge, F.; Shen, Y. Indoor localization system with NLoS mitigation based on self-training. IEEE Trans. Mob.
      Comput. 2022, 22, 3952–3966.
82.   Niu, Z.; Yang, H.; Zhou, L.; Taha, M.F.; He, Y.; Qiu, Z. Deep learning-based ranging error mitigation method for UWB localization
      system in greenhouse. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2023, 205, 107573.
83.   Peterseil, P.; Etzlinger, B.; Khanzadeh, R.; Springer, A. Trustworthiness score for UWB indoor localization. In Proceedings
      of the GLOBECOM 2023-2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 4–8 December 2023; IEEE:
      Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 189–194.
84.   Yang, H.; Wang, Y.; Seow, C.K.; Sun, M.; Si, M.; Huang, L. UWB sensor-based indoor LoS/NLoS localization with support vector
      machine learning. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 2988–3004.
85.   Zhang, K.; Xi, Z.; Zheng, F. UWB indoor positioning system based on NLoS recognition. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE 6th
      International Conference on Automation, Electronics and Electrical Engineering (AUTEEE), Shenyang, China, 15–17 December
      2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 376–379.
86.   Li, X.; Hu, B.; Dong, X. Learning-Based Ultra-Wideband Indoor Ranging. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Pacific Rim Conference
      on Communications, Computers and Signal Processing (PACRIM), Victoria, BC, Canada, 21–24 August 2024; IEEE: Piscataway,
      NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
87.   Zhang, S.; Wang, E.; Zhu, Z.; Yi, J.; Wang, Y.; Kuai, E. UKF-FNN-RIC: A highly accurate UWB localization algorithm for TOA
      scenario. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2024, 73, 8508013.
88.   Cui, X.; Li, Y.; Li, J.; Jiang, B.; Li, S.; Liu, J. UWB wireless positioning method based on LightGBM. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2024,
      137, 1141–1160.
89.   Zhao, W.; Goudar, A.; Tang, M.; Qiao, X.; Schoellig, A.P. Uncertainty-aware gaussian mixture model for UWB time difference
      of arrival localization in cluttered environments. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
      Robots and Systems (IROS), Detroit, MI, USA, 1–5 October 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 5266–5273.
90.   Tu, C.; Zhang, J.; Quan, Z.; Ding, Y. UWB indoor localization method based on neural network multi-classification for NLoS
      distance correction. Sens. Actuators A Phys. 2024, 379, 115904.
91.   Zhang, B.; Shen, L.; Yao, J.; Wang, T.; Tang, S.K.; Mirri, S. Automatic Tracking Based on Weighted Fusion Back Propagation in
      UWB for IoT Devices. Sensors 2024, 24, 1257.
92.   Li, C.; Zhang, Y.; Qiao, J.; Gao, R.; Liu, K.; Zhang, Y. LSTM-Based Error Correction for Reducing UWB Measurement Errors.
      In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Engineering and Networks, Wuxi, China, 3–5 November 2023;
      Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2023; pp. 527–534.
93.   Kim, D.H.; Pyun, J.Y. Enhanced UWB ranging utilizing denoising neural network. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2024, 28, 1029–1033.
94.   Chao, T.; Tian, J.; Yang, M. A Gaussian process regression-based multi-target orientation compensation algorithm for distance
      measurement. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2024, 73, 9516111.
95.   Moragrega, A.; Fernández-Prades, C. Improving the Convergence of a Data-Driven Factor Graph Model for UWB-Based
      Positioning in Challenging Indoor Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 2024 34th International Telecommunication Networks and
      Applications Conference (ITNAC), Sydney, Australia, 27–29 November 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–4.
96.   Fontaine, J.; Che, F.; Shahid, A.; Van Herbruggen, B.; Ahmed, Q.Z.; Abbas, W.B.; De Poorter, E. Transfer learning for UWB error
      correction and (N) LoS classification in multiple environments. IEEE Internet Things J. 2023, 11, 4085–4101.



                                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                         52 of 56




97.  Han, K.; Liu, B.; Deng, Z. A tightly coupled positioning method of ranging signal and IMU based on NLoS recognition. In
     Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 12th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Beijing, China,
     5–8 September 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1–8.
98. Liu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Liu, W.; Yang, F. Uwb-ins fusion positioning based on a two-stage optimization algorithm. Tehnički
     vjesnik 2023, 30, 185–190.
99. Bhattacharya, S.; Choi, J. RNN-based robust smartphone indoor localization on ultra-wideband DL-TDOA. In Proceedings of the
     2023 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), Rome, Italy, 28 May–1 June 2023; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 500–505.
100. Cheng, L.; Liu, K. INS/UWB fusion localization algorithm in indoor environment based on variational Bayesian and error
     compensation. J. Frankl. Inst. 2024, 361, 107204.
101. Cheng, L.; Cui, C.; Zhao, Z.; Shi, Y. An improved multi-filter fusion indoor localization algorithm based on INS and UWB. Earth
     Sci. Inform. 2024, 17, 2509–2521.
102. Eang, C.; Lee, S. An integration of deep neural network-based extended Kalman filter (DNN-EKF) method in ultra-wideband
     (UWB) localization for distance loss optimization. Sensors 2024, 24, 7643.
103. Arjmandi, Z.; Kang, J.; Sohn, G.; Armenakis, C.; Shahbazi, M. DeepCovPG: Deep-Learning-based Dynamic Covariance Prediction
     in Pose Graphs for Ultra-Wideband-Aided UAV Positioning. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE 20th International Conference
     on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), Bari, Italy, 28 August–1 September 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp.
     3836–3843.
104. Zhang, B.; Zhan, H.; Hou, Y.; Chen, X. Ultra-wideband/BDS Indoor and Outdoor Seamless Positioning Algorithm Based on
     FNN-WCF. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2022 5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Pattern
     Recognition, Xiamen, China, 23–25 September 2022; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2022; pp. 1120–1125.
105. Kao, P.Y.; Chang, H.J.; Tseng, K.W.; Chen, T.; Luo, H.L.; Hung, Y.P. VIUNet: Deep visual–inertial–UWB fusion for indoor UAV
     localization. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 61525–61534.
106. Lu, Y.M.; Sheu, J.P.; Kuo, Y.C. Deep learning for ultra-wideband indoor positioning. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE 32nd Annual
     International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Helsinki, Finland, 13–16 September
     2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1260–1266.
107. Djosic, S.; Stojanovic, I.; Jovanovic, M.; Nikolic, T.; Djordjevic, G.L. Fingerprinting-assisted UWB-based localization technique for
     complex indoor environments. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021, 167, 114188.
108. Sun, J.; Gu, R.; Li, S.; Ma, S.; Wang, H.; Li, Z.; Feng, W. HUID: DBN-based fingerprint localization and tracking system with
     hybrid UWB and IMU. China Commun. 2023, 20, 139–154.
109. Guo, H.; Li, M. Indoor positioning optimization based on genetic algorithm and RBF neural network. In Proceedings of the 2020
     IEEE International Conference on Power, Intelligent Computing and Systems (ICPICS), Shenyang, China, 28–30 July 2020; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 778–781.
110. Huang, S.; Chen, J.; Jiang, H. UWB indoor location based on improved least square support vector machine considering anchor
     anomaly. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Control & Automation (ICCA), Singapore, 9–11
     October 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 324–329.
111. Geyer, F.; Schupke, D. Precise onboard aircraft cabin localization using UWB and ML. In Proceedings of the GLOBECOM
     2022-2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 4–8 December 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022;
     pp. 2032–2037.
112. Tang, K.; Yang, B.; Ding, K. Deep attention-based network combing geometric information for UWB localization in complex
     indoor environments. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 31488–31497.
113. Prakoso, G.A.; Syafalni, I.; Sutisna, N.; Mulyawan, R.; Ahmadi, N.; Adiono, T.; Rokhani, F.Z. A Novel Prediction Technique for
     Intermittent UWB Positioning System Using Hybrid LSTM-Trilateration. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference
     on Circuits and Systems (APCCAS), Taipei, Taiwan, 7–9 November 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 618–622.
114. Petrović, M.; Ci˛eżkowski, M.; Romaniuk, S.; Wolniakowski, A.; Miljković, Z. A novel hybrid NN-ABPE-based calibration method
     for improving accuracy of lateration positioning system. Sensors 2021, 21, 8204.
115. Guo, H.; Li, M.; Zhang, X.; Gao, X.; Liu, Q. UWB indoor positioning optimization algorithm based on genetic annealing and
     clustering analysis. Front. Neurorobotics 2022, 16, 715440.
116. Lou, P.; Zhao, Q.; Zhang, X.; Li, D.; Hu, J. Indoor positioning system with UWB based on a digital twin. Sensors 2022, 22, 5936.
117. Ma, J.; Duan, X.; Shang, C.; Ma, M.; Zhang, D. Improved extreme learning machine based UWB positioning for mobile robots
     with signal interference. Machines 2022, 10, 218.
118. Morawska, B.; Lipinski, P.; Lichy, K.; Adamkiewicz, K. Transfer learning-based UWB indoor localization using MHT-MDC and
     clusterization-based sparse fingerprinting. J. Comput. Sci. 2022, 61, 101654.
119. Xu, Y.; Wan, D.; Feng, J.; Shen, T.; Sun, B. XGB assisted self-learning Kalman filter for UWB localization. Int. Arch. Photogramm.
     Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2022, 46, 227–233.



                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                        53 of 56




120. Yang, B.; Li, J.; Shao, Z.; Zhang, H. Robust UWB indoor localization for NLoS scenes via learning spatial-temporal features. IEEE
     Sens. J. 2022, 22, 7990–8000.
121. Djosic, S.; Stojanovic, I.; Jovanovic, M.; Djordjevic, G.L. Multi-algorithm UWB-based localization method for mixed LoS/NLoS
     environments. Comput. Commun. 2022, 181, 365–373.
122. Bhattacharya, S.; Choi, J.; Lee, J. Power-efficient indoor localization using adaptive channel-aware ultra-wideband DL-TDOA. In
     Proceedings of the GLOBECOM 2023-2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 4–8 December
     2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 7465–7470.
123. Jones, B.; Raza, U.; Khan, A. Tiny but mighty: Embedded machine learning for indoor wireless localization. In Proceedings of the
     2023 IEEE 20th Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 8–11 January 2023; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 176–181.
124. Kilinç, B.; Habib, B.; Rodoplu, V. Machine Learning Based Multipath Processing Architecture for Mobile IoT Indoor Positioning.
     In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE 9th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Aveiro, Portugal, 12–27 October 2023; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 1–6.
125. Xu, X.; Zhao, R.; Li, J.; Sun, J. Ultra-wide Band Positioning with Signal Interference based on Two-Stream Residual Network.
     In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), Sorrento, Italy, 15–18 December 2023; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 976–985.
126. Yang, B.; Li, J.; Shao, Z.; Zhang, H. Self-supervised deep location and ranging error correction for UWB localization. IEEE Sens. J.
     2023, 23, 9549–9559.
127. Zhao, C.; Song, A.; Zhu, Y.; Jiang, S.; Liao, F.; Du, Y. Data-driven indoor positioning correction for infrastructure-enabled
     autonomous driving systems: A lifelong framework. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2023, 24, 3908–3921.
128. Coppens, D.; Shahid, A.; De Poorter, E. Beyond Convolutions: Transformer Networks for Improved UWB CIR-based Fingerprint-
     ing. In Proceedings of the 2024 14th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Hong Kong,
     China, 14–17 October 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
129. He, S.; Yang, B.; Liu, T.; Zhang, H. Multi-Tag UWB Localization with Spatial-Temporal Attention Graph Neural Network. IEEE
     Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2024.
130. Mu, H.; Yu, C.; Jiang, S.; Luo, Y.; Zhao, K.; Chen, W. Indoor Pedestrian Positioning Method Based on Ultra-Wideband with a
     Graph Convolutional Network and Visual Fusion. Sensors 2024, 24, 6732.
131. Tian, Y.; Lian, Z.; Wang, P.; Wang, M.; Yue, Z.; Chai, H. Application of a long short-term memory neural network algorithm fused
     with Kalman filter in UWB indoor positioning. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 1925.
132. Tlili, S.; Mnasri, S.; Val, T. UWB time of flight-based indoor IoT localisation solution with deep learning optimised by meta-
     heuristics. Int. J. Sens. Netw. 2024, 44, 99–123.
133. Wang, Y.; Zhang, D.; Li, Z.; Lu, M.; Zheng, Y.; Fang, T. System and method for reducing NLoS errors in UWB indoor positioning.
     Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 5123.
134. Yang, J.; Gao, J.; Sun, W.; Jing, X. A UWB indoor positioning method based on triple filtering fingerprint matching algorithm. J.
     Phys. Conf. Ser. 2024, 2813, 012003.
135. Zheng, H.; Meng, F.; Wang, H. Optimization of indoor vehicle ultra-wideband 3D localization using graph attention networks.
     Trans. Inst. Meas. Control 2025, 47, 1651–1661.
136. Chen, X.; Fu, M.; Liu, Z.; Jia, C.; Liu, Y. Harris hawks optimization algorithm and BP neural network for ultra-wideband indoor
     positioning. Math. Biosci. Eng. 2022, 19, 9098–9124.
137. Wang, T.; Man, Y.; Shen, Y. A deep learning based AoA estimation method in NLoS environments. In Proceedings of the 2021
     IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Madrid, Spain, 7–11 December 2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1–6.
138. Hong, K.; Wang, T.; Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Shen, Y. A learning-based AoA estimation method for device-free localization. IEEE
     Commun. Lett. 2022, 26, 1264–1267.
139. Nguyen, H.A.; Nguyen, V.K.; Witrisal, K. Amplitude modeling of specular multipath components for robust indoor localization.
     Sensors 2022, 22, 462.
140. Wang, T.; Li, Y.; Liu, J.; Shen, Y. A learning-based NLoS mitigation method for single-anchor slam. In Proceedings of the 2022
     16th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), Madrid, Spain, 27 March–1 April 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
     USA, 2022; pp. 1–5.
141. Kirmaz, A.; Şahin, T.; Michalopoulos, D.S.; Gerstacker, W. Time-based vs. Fingerprinting-based Positioning Using Artificial
     Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2023 13th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
     Nuremberg, Germany, 25–28 September 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 1–6.
142. Wang, T.; Li, Y.; Liu, J.; Hu, K.; Shen, Y. Multipath-assisted single-anchor localization via deep variational learning. IEEE Trans.
     Wirel. Commun. 2024, 23, 9113–9128.
143. Ge, F.; Shen, Y. Single-anchor ultra-wideband localization system using wrapped PDoA. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2021,
     21, 4609–4623.



                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                        54 of 56




144. Kirmaz, A.; Şahin, T.; Michalopoulos, D.S.; Gerstacker, W. ToA and TDoA estimation using artificial neural networks for
     high-accuracy ranging. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 2023, 41, 3816–3830.
145. Li, S.; Balatsoukas-Stimming, A.; Burg, A. Device-free movement tracking using the UWB channel impulse response with
     machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 23rd International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless
     Communication (SPAWC), Oulu, Finland, 4–6 July 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1–5.
146. Liu, J.; Wang, T.; Li, Y.; Li, C.; Wang, Y.; Shen, Y. A transformer-based signal denoising network for AoA estimation in NLoS
     environments. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2022, 26, 2336–2339.
147. Guo, H.; Li, M.; Zhang, X.; Liu, Q.; Gao, X. Research on indoor wireless positioning precision optimization based on UWB. J. Web
     Eng. 2020, 19, 1017–1048.
148. Zhang, K.; Gao, S.; Lv, J.; Lin, T.; Chen, P. UWTrack: Clustering Assisted Multi-person Passive Indoor Tracking via IR-UWB. IEEE
     Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2024, 73, 5038914.
149. Nkrow, R.E.; Silva, B.; Boshoff, D.; Hancke, G.P. Transfer learning-based NLoS identification for UWB in dynamic obstructed
     settings. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2023, 20, 4839–4849.
150. Jiang, C.; Shen, J.; Chen, S.; Chen, Y.; Liu, D.; Bo, Y. UWB NLoS/LoS classification using deep learning method. IEEE Commun.
     Lett. 2020, 24, 2226–2230.
151. Masek, P.; Sedlacek, P.; Ometov, A.; Mekyska, J.; Mlynek, P.; Hosek, J.; Komarov, M. Improving the precision of wireless
     localization algorithms: ML techniques for indoor positioning. In Proceedings of the 2020 43rd International Conference on
     Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP), Milan, Italy, 7–9 July 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 589–594.
152. Zhao, Z.; Huang, W.; Liang, Y.; Zhang, Y. A NLoS detection method based on machine learning in UWB indoor location system.
     In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Virtual Reality and Intelligent Systems (ICVRIS), Zhangjiajie, China, 18–19
     July 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 214–217.
153. Yang, Y.; Zhang, L.; Xu, J.; Li, D.; Bao, J.; Tan, J. Cooperative indoor localization system based UWB and random forest algorithm
     in complicated underground NLoS scenario. In Proceedings of the 2022 9th international conference on digital home (ICDH),
     Guangzhou, China, 28–30 October 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 271–276.
154. Deng, B.; Yan, M.; Xu, T. A Parallel Deep Learning Based NLoS Identification Method Using CIR Signal. In Proceedings of the
     2023 42nd Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Tianjin, China, 24–26 July 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 8312–8317.
155. Kong, Q. NLoS identification for UWB positioning based on IDBO and convolutional neural networks. IEEE Access 2023,
     11, 144705–144721.
156. Miramá, V.; Bahillo, A.; Quintero, V.; Díez, L.E. NLoS detection generated by body shadowing in a 6.5 GHz UWB localization
     system using machine learning. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 20400–20411.
157. Sun, Z.; Wang, K.; Sun, R.; Chen, Z. Channel state identification in complex indoor environments with ST-CNN and transfer
     learning. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2022, 27, 546–550.
158. Sung, S.; Kim, H.; Jung, J.I. Accurate indoor positioning for UWB-based personal devices using deep learning. IEEE Access 2023,
     11, 20095–20113.
159. Ghaemifar, M.; Ebadollahi, S.; Ghasemzadeh, M.; Pirahmadian, S. A novel CNN model for NLoS classification in UWB indoor
     positioning system. In Proceedings of the 2024 10th international conference on web research (ICWR), Tehran, Iran, 24–25 April
     2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 182–186.
160. Lv, H.; Feng, J.; Shou, H.; Zhang, J.; Cui, T.; Mei, Z. UWB localization based on dual-channel neural network and total least square
     method. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 24, 3477–3487.
161. Olejniczak, A.; Blaszkiewicz, O.; Cwalina, K.K.; Rajchowski, P.; Sadowski, J. LoS and NLoS identification in real indoor
     environment using deep learning approach. Digit. Commun. Netw. 2024, 10, 1305–1312.
162. Pei, Y.; Chen, R.; Li, D.; Xiao, X.; Zheng, X. FCN-Attention: A deep learning UWB NLoS/LoS classification algorithm using fully
     convolution neural network with self-attention mechanism. Geo-Spat. Inf. Sci. 2024, 27, 1162–1181.
163. Wang, S.; Ahmad, N.S. Robust classification of UWB NLoS/LoS using combined FCE and XGBoost algorithms. IEEE Access 2024,
     12, 151030–151045.
164. Wang, K.; Yang, C. Analysis of Machine Learning-Based NLoS Signal Identification Algorithm for UWB Indoor Localization
     Using CIR Waveform Features. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2024, 48, 705–710.
165. Wang, Y.; Zhou, J.; Yang, A.; Li, W. Ultra-wideband Non-line-of-sight Recognition Method Based on MTF-CNN. In Proceedings
     of the 2024 International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC), Hangzhou, China, 18–20 October 2024; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
166. Hua, Q.; Nielsen, M.H.; An, Z.; Ren, J.; Wisniewski, R.; Kold, S.; Rahbek, O.; Shen, M. Lab to Multiscene Generalization for
     Non-Line-of-Sight Identification With Small-Scale Datasets. IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. 2023, 5, 516–529.
167. Yang, H.; Wang, Y.; Seow, C.; Sun, M.; Plets, D. UWB NLoS identification and mitigation based on bidirectional encoder
     representations from transformer (BERT) deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2024 14th International Conference on Indoor
     Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Hong Kong, China, 14–17 October 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.



                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                          55 of 56




168. Che, F.; Abbas, W.B.; Ahmed, Q.Z.; Amjad, B.; Khan, F.A.; Lazaridis, P.I. Weighted naive Bayes approach for imbalanced indoor
     positioning system using UWB. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and
     Networking (BlackSeaCom), Sofia, Bulgaria, 6–9 June 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 72–76.
169. Zhang, C.; Wang, H.; Wang, Z.; Wang, F.; Min, M.; Li, S. Non-line-of-Sight Recognition Algorithm Based on Deep Learning. In
     Proceedings of the International Conference on Internet of Things, Communication and Intelligent Technology, Changsha, China,
     21–23 August 2022; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022; pp. 659–667.
170. Agarwal, P.; Kumar, R.; Jhariya, D.K.; Singh, M.K. Comparative Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms for LoS/NLoS
     Identification. In Proceedings of the 2024 First International Conference on Electronics, Communication and Signal Processing
     (ICECSP), New Delhi, India, 8–10 August 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–5.
171. Brasseler, L.; Stahlke, M.; Altstidl, T.; Feigl, T.; Mutschler, C. Non-Line-of-Sight Detection for Radio Localization using Deep State
     Space Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 14th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
     Hong Kong, China, 14–17 October 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
172. Muqaibel, A.H.; Alawsh, S.A.; BinMakhashen, G.M. Under-Sampled UWB NLoS/LoS Channel Classification using Machine
     Learning. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2025, 50, 6095–6108.
173. Bharadwaj, R.; Alomainy, A.; Koul, S.K. Experimental investigation of body-centric indoor localization using compact wearable
     antennas and machine learning algorithms. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 2021, 70, 1344–1354.
174. Wang, J.; Yu, K.; Bu, J.; Lin, Y.; Han, S. Multi-classification of UWB signal propagation channels based on one-dimensional wavelet
     packet analysis and CNN. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2022, 71, 8534–8547.
175. Majeed, A.F.; Arsat, R.; Baharudin, M.A.; Latiff, N.M.A.; Albaidhani, A. Accurate multiclass NLoS channels identification in
     UWB indoor positioning system-based deep neural network. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 179431–179448.
176. Majeed, A.F.; Arsat, R.; Baharudin, M.A.; Latiff, N.M.A.; Albaidhani, A. Multiclass Identification of NLoS Conditions in
     UWB Localization Based Machine Learning Methods. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE International Conference on Advanced
     Telecommunication and Networking Technologies (ATNT), Johor Bahru, Malaysia, 9–10 September 2024; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
     USA, 2024; Volume 1, pp. 1–4.
177. Hu, B.; Li, X.; Dong, X. Learning-Based Ultra-Wideband Indoor NLoS Identification. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Pacific Rim
     Conference on Communications, Computers and Signal Processing (PACRIM), Victoria, BC, Canada, 21–24 August 2024; IEEE:
     Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
178. Liu, Q.; Yin, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, Z.; Wu, M. UWB LoS/NLoS identification in multiple indoor environments using deep learning
     methods. Phys. Commun. 2022, 52, 101695.
179. Zhu, F.; Yu, K.; Lin, Y.; Wang, C.; Wang, J.; Chao, M. Robust LoS/NLoS identification for UWB signals using improved fuzzy
     decision tree under volatile indoor conditions. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2023, 72, 2514911.
180. Yang, Y.; Ke, H.; Gan, W.; Deng, Z. CNN-biLSTM-attention: A novel neural network with attention mechanism for NLoS
     identification of UWB signal. In Proceedings of the 2023 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Communications and
     Computing (ICC), Nanchang, China, 24–26 November 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 279–283.
181. Wang, Q.; Chen, M.S.; Yan, X.; Lin, Y.C.; Li, K.; Liu, J.J.; Zhang, C.Z. Domain-Adversarial Learning for UWB NLoS Identification
     in Dynamic Obstacle Environments. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 25, 23312–23325.
182. Wang, P.; Lian, Z.; Núñez-Andrés, M.A.; Calabia, A.; Tian, Y.; Wang, M.; Yue, Z.; Mu, H. Application of the Least Squares
     Adaptive Vector Projection Iteration Algorithm to Ultra-Wideband Positioning. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 37275–37285.
183. Guan, G.; Chen, G. An improved LSE-EKF optimisation algorithm for UAV UWB positioning in complex indoor environments.
     J. Control Decis. 2023, 10, 547–559.
184. Gómez-Vega, C.A.; Win, M.Z.; Conti, A. UWB Localization-of-Things Via Soft Information: Network Experimentation in Indoor
     Environment. In Proceedings of the ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
     (ICASSP), Rhodes Island, Greece, 4–10 June 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 1–5.
185. Adamkiewicz, K.; Koch, P.; Morawska, B.; Lipiński, P.; Lichy, K.; Leplawy, M. Improving UWB indoor localization accuracy using
     sparse fingerprinting and transfer learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, Krakow,
     Poland, 16–18 June 2021; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 291–302.
186. Csik, D.; Odry, Á.; Sarcevic, P. Fingerprinting-based indoor positioning using data fusion of different radiocommunication-based
     technologies. Machines 2023, 11, 302.
187. Sarcevic, P.; Csík, D.; Pesti, R.; Stefanoni, M.; Sárosi, J.; Odry, Á. Fingerprint-based fusion of magnetic field data with multiple
     wireless technologies for indoor mobile robot positioning. In Proceedings of the 2023 13th International Conference on Indoor
     Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Nuremberg, Germany, 25–28 September 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp.
     1–6.
188. Wang, Q.; Chen, M.; Liu, J.; Lin, Y.; Li, K.; Yan, X.; Zhang, C. 1D-CLANet: A Novel Network for NLoS Classification in UWB
     Indoor Positioning System. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 7609.




                                                                                                https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
Electronics 2026, 15, 181                                                                                                       56 of 56




189. Van Herbruggen, B.; Fontaine, J.; De Poorter, E. Anchor pair selection for error correction in time difference of arrival (TDoA)
     ultra wideband (UWB) positioning systems. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and
     Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Lloret de Mar, Spain, 29 November–2 December 2021; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1–8.
190. Wu, T.; Li, H.; Gao, B.; Xiong, K.; Fan, P.; Letaief, K.B. NM-LUD: A NLoS Mitigation Method with Low-cost UWB Devices for
     Indoor Positioning. In Proceedings of the 2023 8th International Conference on Computer and Communication Systems (ICCCS),
     Guangzhou, China, 21–23 April 2023; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 204–208.
191. Stocker, M.; Gallacher, M.; Boano, C.A.; Römer, K. Performance of support vector regression in correcting UWB ranging
     measurements under LoS/NLoS conditions. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the Workshop on Benchmarking Cyber-
     Physical Systems and Internet of Things, Nashville, TN, USA, 18 May 2021; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2021; pp. 6–11.
192. Bregar, K. Indoor UWB positioning and position tracking data set. Sci. Data 2023, 10, 744.
193. Angarano, S.; Salvetti, F.; Mazzia, V.; Fantin, G.; Chiaberge, M. DeepUWB: A Dataset for UWB Ranging Error Mitigation in Indoor
     Environments. Zenodo, 2020. Available online: https://zenodo.org/record/4290069 (accessed on 1 December 2025).
194. Moragrega, A. Datasets of Indoor UWB Measurements for Ranging and Positioning in Good and Challenging Scenarios. Zenodo,
     2022. Available online: https://zenodo.org/records/5095373 (accessed on 1 December 2025).
195. van den Bossche, A.; Dalce, R.; Val, T. LocURa4IoT—A testbed dedicated to accurate localization of wireless nodes in the IoT.
     IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 22, 5437–5446.
196. Kram, S.; Stahlke, M.; Mutschler, C. Track 7: Channel Impulse Responses (IPIN 2021 Competition Dataset). Fraunhofer Institute
     for Integrated Circuits IIS, 2021. Available online: https://owncloud.fraunhofer.de/index.php/s/1O20E6txlrYymqe (accessed
     on 1 December 2025).
197. Ledergerber, A.; D’Andrea, R. A multi-static radar network with ultra-wideband radio-equipped devices. Sensors 2020, 20, 1599.
198. Zhao, W.; Goudar, A.; Qiao, X.; Schoellig, A.P. UTIL: An ultra-wideband time-difference-of-arrival indoor localization dataset.
     Int. J. Robot. Res. 2024, 43, 1443–1456.
199. Botler, D. UWB RSS Dataset. 2023. Available online: https://bitbucket.org/leobotler/uwb-rss-dataset/src/master/ (accessed on
     1 December 2025).
200. Hwang, H.J.; Jeong, S.G.; Hwang, W.J. Ultrawideband Non-Line-of-Sight Classification Using Transformer-Convolutional Neural
     Networks. IEEE Access 2025, 13, 86323–86332.
201. Muthineni, K.; Artemenko, A.; Vidal, J.; Nájar, M.; Catalan, M.; Paradells, J. Deep learning-based UWB-IMU data fusion for
     indoor positioning in industrial scenario. IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. 2025, 6, 1209–1221.
202. Nkrow, R.E.; Boshoff, D.; Silva, B.; Hancke, G.P. AdaLoS: A Domain Adaptive UWB NLoS Identification for Dynamic Settings.
     IEEE Internet Things J. 2025, 12, 33363–33375.
203. Wang, T.; Shu, Y.; Qiao, L.; Ding, D.; Li, G. LightMamba: A Resource-Efficient Deep Learning Method for UWB NLoS Identification
     Based on Selective State-Space Modeling. IEEE Internet Things J. 2025, doi:10.1109/JIOT.2025.3641826.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.




                                                                                             https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15010181
